Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-69761-x
Breaking through safety performance
stagnation in autonomous vehicles with
dense learning
Shuo Feng 1, Haojie Zhu 2,H a o w e iS u n2,X i n t a oY a n2,5,L i n x u a nH e1,
Jingxuan Yang 1,G u a n g z h e nS u1,B o q iL i2,S h uL i 1,L i n gW a n g1,
Shengyin Shen 3 &H e n r yX .L i u 2,3,4
Autonomous vehicles remain commercially limited largely due to safety per-
formance stagnation. Existing deep learning, heavily reliant on failure data
from rare safety-critical events, suffers from the seesaw effect— improvement
in some scenarios causes regression in others. We introduce an innovative
dense learning approach that prioritizes both informative failures and suc-
cesses, informed by theoreticalﬁndings. Data is sampled proportionally to its
contribution to the policy gradient and exposure frequency, excluding non-
informative samples. This densiﬁes the training dataset’ si n f o r m a t i o n ,s i g -
niﬁcantly reducing learning variance without bias, enabling tasks intractable
for existing methods. To validate this, wetrained a safety-critical driving agent
for a highly automated vehicle using mixed reality on an urban test track.
Results demonstrate that our approachbreaks the performance stagnation,
enhancing the model’ s overall safety performance by one to two orders of
magnitude. This marks a signiﬁcant stride towards achieving human-level
safety and widespread adoption for autonomous vehicles.
The dream of autonomous vehicles (AVs) has been around for
approximately a century 1. Enormous amounts of capital, exceeding
$160 billion, have been invested in this vision over the past twenty
years2. Despite witnessing signiﬁcant advancements in AV technology,
no commercially available AVs have yet met the SAE Level 4 standard3.
The pace of progress in AV development has been disappointingly
slow, particularly when it comes to ensuring their safety, which has
remained stagnant in recent times. The situation was further exacer-
bated by the unfortunate accident involving Cruise Automation in San
Francisco on October 2nd, 2023
4. This safety gap presents a signiﬁcant
obstacle to the deployment and commercialization of AVs, as they
struggle to effectively handle a wide array of infrequent yet critical
safety events, commonly referred to as the long-tail challenge for AV
safety
5,6. Existing approaches have proven inadequate in overcoming
this challenge, resulting in a noticeable slowdown and even stagnation
in the enhancement of AV safety performance. Consequently, the
development and deployment of AVs have been severely hindered,
calling for an urgent breakthrough.
We formulate the safety challenge for AVs as the Curse of Rarity
(CoR)
7, which arises due to the rarity of safety-critical events in high-
dimensional variable spaces. We recognize that this is a compounding
effect resulting from the rarity of events combined with the high
dimensionality of related variables. As the utilization of deep learning
techniques is typically necessary to address the high dimensionality,
the rarity of events dramatically increases the estimation variance of
policy gradient, thereby impeding the ability of deep-learning models
to learn. This challenge exists in different AV safety-related tasks, and
we attacked it in the AV safety testing task in our prior work
8.H o w e v e r ,
Received: 30 March 2025
Accepted: 4 February 2026
Check for updates
1Department of Automation, Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.2Department of
Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.3University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA. 4Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.5Present address: Department of Civil Engineering, The University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. e-mail: henryliu@umich.edu
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:3163 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
the main objective of AV testing is to evaluate the safety performance
by estimating the probabilities of rare events (e.g. car collisions) given
as p e c iﬁc AV policy, whereas the AV training task is to improve the
safety performance by searching for a policy from the AV policy space
that can minimize these probabilities. This fundamental distinction
makes AV training considerably more challenging than AV testing.
Furthermore, during the AV training process, better AV safety perfor-
mance also means fewer safety-critical events, which, in turn, makes it
more difﬁcult to improve the safety performance. These issues pose
signiﬁcant obstacles to the development of AVs to ensure safety per-
formance. It should be emphasized that previous advancements in AI
have primarily been focused on non-safety-critical applications such as
chatbots and games
9– 12, where a certain level of failure is deemed
acceptable. However, when it comes to safety-critical autonomous
systems
13 such as AVs, an extremely high level of safety performance is
demanded, resulting in the CoR challenge.
Existing approaches that attempted to tackle the CoR challenge
primarily focus on learning from the data where AI systems exhibit
failures
14. For instance, Tesla had reported training their systems on
datasets that represent scenarios where AVs struggle or deviate from
human driver behavior15. However, it is important to note that these
approaches lack a solid theoretical foundation, and our investigations
have revealed that they can exhibit signi ﬁcant biases and even be
misleading. Consequently, while these approaches may enhance the
a
b Data collection
Intelligent testing environmentCollected
data
Episodic data densification
Offline
resampling
Data
classification
State-level data densification
Learned
safety metric
State
reconnecting
State
deleting
Informative states
Other states
Crashes
Near-misses
Collecting training data with purposely
generated testing environment
Re-simulated data
Dense learning approach for training
Retrospective data densification
Counterfactual simulation
Learning from
all data
Learning from
crash data
Learning from
densified data
Suffer from
learning variance
No performance
change
Suffer from
learning biasedness
Overall safety
performance improved
Reduce variance
with unbiasedness
Crash data
All data
Avoided
crashes
New
crashes
Stagnation in overall
performacne
CoR challenge
Seesaw effect
Overcome CoR
and seesaw effect
Near-miss data
c
Dense-Learning based SafeDriver
Steering
angle
Acceleration
Unsafe
Safe
Base Model
Observation
Ego vehicle
Background vehicle
Risk level
Learned safety metric
Rule-based policy,
e.g., AutowareRSS
SafeDriver learning
Base model
Neural
networks
Fig. 1 | Key challenges and our solution for AV safety training. aLearning from all
data suffers from severe variance due to the Curse of Rarity (CoR) challenge and
cannot learn an effective policy. Here an effective policy means that the policy
could improve the safety performance of autonomous vehicles (AVs) with a lower
crash rate. Existing approaches attempted to tackle the CoR challenge primarily
focus on learning from the data where AI systems exhibit failures (such as crash
event data), which could mislead the training process, causing the seesaw effect.
Our approach overcomes this issue by training AVs with densiﬁed data, improving
AVs’ overall safety performances.b Our dense learning approach densiﬁes the
training data through three modules including episodic data densiﬁcation (selec-
tion of informative driving episodes), driving state densiﬁcation (retain informative
states only), and retrospective data densiﬁcation (re-selection of informative
driving episodes through counterfactual simulation). Our approach can dramati-
cally reduce learning variance for rare event learning without loss of unbiasedness
and enable the learning of the SafeDriver model. c During the AV driving process,
the SafeDriver model will only override in safety-critical situations that are identi-
ﬁed by a learned safety metric; in all other situations, the behaviors of the AV will be
controlled by base AV models.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-69761-x
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:3163 2
safety performance of AVs in speci ﬁc scenarios, they run the risk of
compromising performance in other safety-critical situations (Fig.1a).
This phenomenon, known as the seesaw effect in different
domains
16– 18, hinders the improvement of overall safety performance
and leads to performance stagnation. That is also a key reason why
safety-critical driving situations are seemingly endless, despite years of
development in AVs. Alternatively, some researchers have attempted
to prevent unsafe behaviors of AVs based on rules or models such as
formal methods
19– 21 and constrained learning 22– 24.H o w e v e r ,t h i s
approach faces challenges to handle the variability and complexity in
high-dimensional variable spaces, because it is dif ﬁcult to rely on a
predeﬁned set of parameters and assumptions for a wide spectrum of
diverse driving situations
22.
We address the CoR challenge by developing an innovative dense
reinforcement learning approach to overcome performance stagna-
tion and enable AVs to continually improve their safety performance
beyond the current state-of-the-art. The key idea is to remove the non-
i n f o r m a t i v ed a t at od e n s i f yt h ei n formation from different perspec-
tives including the episodic data densi ﬁcation, state-level densiﬁca-
tion, and retrospective data densiﬁcation (see Fig.1b). For the episodic
data densiﬁcation, we found out that the optimal episodic data dis-
tribution for training neural networks to overcome CoR should be
based on their contribution to the policy gradient and their exposure
frequency, as indicated in Theorem 1 in Methods. Speci ﬁcally for the
AV safe driving task, the training data set should include data from
both avoidable crash episodes and episodes where crashes were suc-
cessfully avoided, i.e., near-misses. Moreover, as each driving episode
can span many time steps, we retained and reconnected the safety-
critical states, which can further densify training data within each
driving episode from the state-level, as indicated in Theorem 2 in
Methods. Lastly, due to the changing AV policy during training,
achieving both higher precision and recall rates for identifying infor-
mative episodes and states has become dif ﬁcult. To address this, we
designed a learned safety metric that serves as a real-time predictive
evaluation tool. It also includes a retrospective evaluation component
to re-evaluate all data for the new AV policy through counterfactual
simulation.
To demonstrate the ef ﬁcacy of our methodology, we trained a
safety-critical driving agent (referred to as SafeDriver in this study) for
a SAE Level 4 (ref.3) AV with Autoware
25, which is widely recognized as
the leading open-source automated driving system. As a safety ﬁlter
system26, SafeDriver overrides Autoware only in safety-critical situa-
tions to enhance the overall safety performance of the AV, as shown in
Fig. 1c. As SafeDriver is decoupled from Autoware, it is applicable for
other AV models including those developed based on large neural
network models. We ﬁrst tested the performance of SafeDriver in
multiple simulated naturalistic driving environments (NDEs), then
e q u i p p e daL i n c o l nM K Zh y b r i dw i t hA u t o w a r e ,a n dt e s t e dt h eS a f e -
Driver in a physical urban test track with mixed reality. The results
obtained from both simulation and ﬁeld-testing clearly demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach in training a safety-critical driving
agent. By employing our methodology, the overall safety performance
of the AV models can be signi ﬁcantly enhanced, with improvements
ranging from one to two orders of magnitude.
Results
Dense learning approach for AV training
We demonstrated the seesaw effect for AVs (see Supplementary Sec-
tion 2.3 in Supplementary Information) and then found out that it is
essentially caused by the biasedness of learning and the severe var-
iance caused by the CoR (see Eq. (8) in Methods). Here the biasedness
indicates that the expectation of the gradient estimation is different
from the ground truth, so the learning process could be misled. To
address this issue, we develop the dense reinforcement learning
approach for AV training. The key is to remove the non-informative
data, thereby reducing the learning variance while maintaining the
learning unbiasedness. Removing a larger amount of non-informative
data leads to a greater reduction in variance. However, accurately
deﬁning, identifying, and effectively utilizing informative data for AV
training pose signiﬁcant challenges. We address this challenge from
different perspectives including the episodic data densiﬁcation, state-
level densiﬁcation, and retrospective data densiﬁcation.
For the episodic data densi ﬁcation, we ﬁrst obtain the optimal
training data distribution for AV training based on importance sam-
pling theory
27 as
q/C3
π XðÞ / j j ∇ π Pðω XðÞ =1 Þjj2 × Pπ XðÞ , ð1Þ
where X denotes each driving episode of the training data,π denotes
the AV policy, ω XðÞ = 1 denotes the objective event that is a rare event
(for example, crash events),∇ π Pðω XðÞ =1 Þ is the policy gradient for the
probability of the objective eventω XðÞ =1g i v e nX, ‖∙‖2 denotes the l2
norm of the vector,Pπ XðÞ denotes the exposure frequency ofX in NDE,
q/C3
π XðÞ denotes the optimal probability distribution ofX for training the
policy π, and the symbol/ means ‘ proportional to’ . Here an episode is
a segment of recorded driving data with a predetermined time dura-
tion or distance. It indicates that the optimal training data should
contain both avoidable crash events (informative failures) and near-
miss events (informative successes) where jj∇
π Pðω XðÞ =1 Þjj2 is non-
zero, while the data of those unavoidable crash events and safe
situations should be removed.
The primary obstacle in applying Eq. ( 1)i st h a tjj∇
π Pðω XðÞ =1 Þjj2
for each driving episode of data cannot be calculated practically,
exacerbated by the changing AV policy during the training process. We
note that the key to dense learning is to remove the non-informative
data and keep the informative one, so Eq. ( 1) can be utilized as a gui-
dance for data densi ﬁcation. Therefore, rather than attempting to
compute the precise values of jj∇
π Pðω XðÞ =1 Þjj2,w ea d o p ta n
approximation through a binary classi ﬁcation task. In this task,
jj∇π Pðω XðÞ =1 Þjj2 is approximated as one for informative data, that is,
avoidable crash events and near-miss events. Speciﬁcally, we identiﬁed
a crash event as avoidable if an evasive trajectory is still feasible after
the vehicle state is identiﬁed as safety-critical and a non-crash event as
a near-miss if the minimum relative distance between the AV and
background vehicles is below a pre- determined threshold. Although
these criteria are not unique, we chose these simple yet effective ones
to demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. By sampling
the episodes according to P
π XðÞ and rejecting these where
jj∇π Pðω XðÞ =1 Þjj2 is estimated as zero, our approach realizes the
training data distribution as in Eq. (1), dramatically reducing variance
for rare event learning without compromising unbiasedness, as indi-
c a t e di nT h e o r e m1i nM e t h o d s .
We then conduct the state-level densi ﬁcation and retrospective
data densiﬁcation. As each driving episode may last for many time
steps, we retained and reconnected the informative states to densify
the data from the state-level. This is challenging in AV training, as
different AV policies during the training process could have different
safety-critical states and we need to identify them with both high
precision and recall rates. To address this challenge, we design a
learned safety metric, which obtains better performances than existing
approaches (see Supplementary Fig. 1 and Supplementary Video 2).
Moreover, as AV policy is changed after training, a large policy gap may
exist between the new AV policy and the policy that collected the data.
To bridge this gap, we introduce a retrospective evaluation compo-
nent to reidentify the informative episodes and states for the new AV
policy through counterfactual simulation (see Supplementary Sections
2.1.9 and 2.11 in Supplementary Information). Furthermore, to improve
the efﬁciency of data collection, we also utilize the intelligent testing
environment (ITE) developed in our previous study
8. Utilizing ITE
allows us to accelerate the collection of informative training data by
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-69761-x
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:3163 3
multiple orders of magnitude (see Supplementary Fig. 2, Supplemen-
tary Video 3, and Supplementary Section 2.7 in Supplementary
Information).
Simulation results
We evaluated the effectiveness of our approach by systematic simu-
lation analysis. To measure the overall safety performances of AVs for
quantitative comparisons, we utilized the crash rate per test of AVs in
NDE. As NDE is generated based on naturalistic driving data, testing
results in NDE can represent the safety performance of AVs in the real
world
28.S p e c iﬁcally, we selected different types of base AV models,
and trained SafeDriver that only takes over from the base AV models in
safety-critical states (identiﬁed by the learned safety metric), resulting
in the integrated AV models. We then compared the safety perfor-
mances of base AV models and integrated AV models in NDE. Although
we refer to the baseline models as ‘ base’ AV models, they could be
advanced commercial AV models with large-scale neural networks
together with their own safety guards. To demonstrate the general-
izability and applicability of our approach, we conducted experiments
for four types of base AV models in different driving environments
including highway, roundabout, and urban environments (Fig. 2). In
this study, we only utilized a simple Multilayer Perceptron as
backbone to demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, so the
performances could be further improved with more advanced
backbones.
Figure 2a shows the results of a multi-lane highway environment.
We trained a RL-based AV model using the proximal policy optimiza-
tion (PPO) algorithm
28,29 (see Supplementary Section 6.7 in Supple-
mentary Materials) and obtained its crash rate as 1 :36 × 10/C02 in NDE.
We further implemented the responsibility-sensitive safety (RSS)
model30 as the default safety guard. Through millions of tests of the
b a s eA Vm o d e lw i t hR S Si nN D E ,w eo b t a i n e dt h ec r a s hr a t ea s
2:71 × 10
/C05 crash per test. Then, we trained SafeDriver using our
approach without RSS (Fig. 2a, red line). The results revealed a crash
rate of 3 :71 × 10/C06,m a k i n ga n8 6:3% reduction in comparison to the
base AV model. When considering only avoidable crashes, our
approach demonstrated a remarkable 91:7% reduction. This suggests
that our approach signi ﬁcantly enhances the overall safety perfor-
mance by approximately one order of magnitude. We also evaluated
the AV model with SafeDriver and RSS, yielding a crash rate of
7:79 × 10
/C06,r e p r e s e n t i n ga7 1:3% reduction compared to the base AV
model with RSS (Fig.2a, purple line). While not as optimal as the model
without RSS, due to the additional constraints introduced by RSS, our
approach still improves overall safety performance. This is signiﬁcant
considering that many AV models may already have their safety guards
or constraints in place. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our
a
c
Base AV model
Our approach
Training time (x104 cpu hour)
98.0%
Base AV model
86.3%
Our approach
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6
Crash rate in NDE (×10-5)
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
0.0 0.7 1.4 2.1 2.8
98.9%
Base AV
model
Our
approach
Base AV
model
Our
approach
91.7%
Our approach with RSS constraints
89.5%
Base AV
model
Our
approach
74.5%
Base AV model
Our approach
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
0.0 1.8 3.6 5.4b
Rear-end Sideswipe
Our approach
Base AV model
Angle Head-on
Route
Route
84.9%
90.6%
Route
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0Avoidable crash rate in NDE (×10-5)
7.2
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0Crash rate in NDE (×10-5)
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
Rear-end Sideswipe Angle Head-on
Our approach
Base AV model
99.8%
97.5%
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
Rear-end Sideswipe Angle Head-on
Our approach
Base AV model
72.1% 73.6% 79.0%
Training time (x103 cpu hour)
Training time (x103 cpu hour)
Crash rate in NDE (×10-3)Crash rate in NDE (×10-7)
Crash rate in NDE (×10-3)Crash rate in NDE (×10-7)
Avoidable crash rate in NDE (×10-3)Avoidable crash rate in NDE (×10-7)
8
9999999
7777
777777
777777
999999999
9
Fig. 2 | Performance evaluation of the dense learning approach in simulations.
a Performance evaluation of our dense learning approach for autonomous vehicle
(AV) training in a multi-lane highway environment with a continuous driving dis-
tance of 400 m. The red line in the map denotes the AV driving route. At each data
point of our approach, we evaluated the AV’ s performance in naturalistic driving
environment (NDE) and recollected the training data for the new AV. The shaded
area represents the 90% conﬁdence level. Our approach could dramatically reduce
the overall crash rate, crash rates of different crash types, and avoidable crash rate,
compared with the base AV model. Here we adopted the crash type diagram
deﬁned by the Fatality Analysis Reporting System
57. We further investigated the
evasive driving behaviors that SafeDriver learned and identiﬁed three typical ones,
including emergency braking, rapid accelerating, and evasive lane changing (Sup-
plementary Fig. 2). Additional case studies are provided in Supplementary Video 4.
b Performance evaluation of our dense learning approach for AV training in
roundabout scenarios. Additional case studies are detailed in Supplementary
Video 5, providing comprehensive insights into our approach in roundabout sce-
narios. c Performance evaluation of our dense learning approach for AV training in
the simulation model of Mcity urban test track. The behaviors of background
vehicles in NDE were constructed based on the large-scale naturalistic driving data
from SPMD
54 and IVBSS55 programs. Additional case studies are provided in Sup-
plementary Video 6.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-69761-x
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:3163 4
approach, we also compared our approach with the provably safe RL
approach31,32 (see Supplementary Section 2.2.5 in Supplementary
Information).
Navigating through roundabouts poses a signiﬁcant challenge for
AVs due to the intricate interactions among AVs and the diverse mix of
surrounding vehicles. To evaluate the effectiveness of our approach in
roundabout scenarios, we expanded our simulation experiments to a
real-world four-armed roundabout
33 in Germany, known for its high
trafﬁc volume and complex intersections. We generated the realistic
driving behaviors of background vehicles in NDE with a Transformer-
based learning approach
28, leveraging the naturalistic driving data in
the RounD dataset33 (see Supplementary Section 2.6 in Supplementary
Information). Using an advanced AV model with a sampling trajectory
generation algorithm
34 as our base AV model, we demonstrated that
our approach signiﬁcantly reduces the AV’ s crash rate by 74.5%, along
with an 89.5% reduction in avoidable crash rates (Fig. 2b).
We further test the performance of SafeDriver when AVs navigate
continuously through urban environments. We utilized the digital twin
of the Mcity test track, and selected two AV models as base models,
one is the default AV model in SUMO
35 (the intelligent driving model
(IDM)36 and the SL2015 model 35 in SUMO) and another one is
Autoware25, which is widely recognized as the leading open-source
automated driving system. Results show that our approach can reduce
the overall crash rate of the SUMO AV model by 98:0% and reduce the
avoidable crash rate by 98 :9% (Fig. 2c), representing a nearly two-
orders-of-magnitude improvement. We integrated the identical Safe-
Driver into Autoware without any additional re ﬁnement, and results
indicate a reduction in the crash rate from 1 :07 × 10
/C06 to 1:07 × 10/C07,
equating to a 90 :0% enhancement in safety performance. This
underscores the efﬁcacy and adaptability of our approach across var-
ious AV models.
To further investigate the contributions of our developed tech-
niques, we conducted ablation studies on the multi-lane highway
environment including 1) no episodic data densi ﬁcation, 2) no state-
level data densiﬁcation, 3) no near-miss episodes, 4) no retrospective
data densiﬁcation, 5) no near-miss and retrospective data densi ﬁca-
tion, 6) no trajectory resampling, and 7) no state reconnection. With
the same training steps such as 780 and 1650 steps, we compared the
crash rates of SafeDriver in NDE as shown in Table 1.R e s u l t sd e m o n -
strate the effectiveness of all developed techniques. Speciﬁcally, both
the episodic data densiﬁcation and state-level data densiﬁcation con-
tribute dramatically, while the retrospective data densi ﬁcation toge-
ther with near-miss scenarios affects the performance signi ﬁcantly.
Please see details in Supplementary Section 2.4 in Supplementary
Information.
To test the scalability and generalizability of our approach, we
implemented a uniﬁed SafeDriver on the nuPlan benchmark
37,r e c o g -
nized as the world ’ s ﬁrst extensive planning benchmark for autono-
mous vehicles, which contains 1200 h of human driving data from 4
cities across the US and Asia with widely varying traf ﬁc patterns
(Boston, Pittsburgh, Las Vegas and Singapore) (Fig. 3a). The goal of
SafeDriver is to utilize a learning-based planner to assist the base
model in navigating through safety-critical scenarios encountered in
urban driving. We selected the state-of-the-art (SOTA) planner PDM-
Hybrid
38 as our base model to demonstrate the effectiveness of Safe-
Driver over the SOTA base model. As shown in Fig. 3b, if the PDM-
Hybrid model predicts a collision within 2 s, SafeDriver takes control;
otherwise, the base model manages the ego vehicle. Results indicate
that SafeDriver reduces the total number of collisions by 21.7% and
decreases AV-responsible crashes by 29.2%, compared with the base
model. Illustration of two examples can be found in Fig. 3c– f. Please
see details in Supplementary Section 2.5 in Supplementary
Information.
Field testing results
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach for real-world AVs,
we outﬁtted a Lincoln MKZ hybrid with Autoware as the base AV model
(Fig. 4a) and conducted the experiments in the physical test tracks at
Mcity (Fig. 4b) with a mixed-reality testing platform (Fig. 4c). One
additional challenge for real AV training is caused by the so-called
simulation-to-reality gap, where AV models developed in simulations
may not seamlessly translate to real-world performance. In this work,
we bridged the gap by iteratively improving the simulation models.
Speciﬁcally, we utilized the same Autoware system in simulation as
employed in the actual AV, mimicked the delay and latency char-
acteristics of the real AV, and compensated for acceleration and
deceleration effects induced by road slopes (Supplementary Fig. 4).
Results demonstrated that, with th is approach, the SafeDriver effec-
tively reduces the crash rate of the real AV in the test track from
1:44 × 10
/C06 to 1:42 × 10/C07, making an impressive 90:1% improvement in
the AV’ s safety performance (see Fig.4d, e and Supplementary Fig. 5).
Recognizing that some crashes are unavoidable due to aggressive
behaviors of background vehicles, we further assessed the crash rate
of avoidable crashes, revealing a 98.8% reduction through our
approach. For a more in-depth understanding, additional case studies
are presented in Fig. 4f.
Discussion
The dense learning approach proposed in this work is theoretically
applicable to the reinforcement learning problem that aims to mini-
mize the expectation of a rare event with an underlying distribution,
although further investigations are required to validate these appli-
cations (see Problem 1 in Supplementary Information). This problem
has been a long-standing challenge in multiple ﬁelds associated with
safety-critical autonomous systems, such as AVs, medical robots, and
aerospace systems. Despite the signiﬁcant advancements in AI systems
such as AlphaGo
10 and GPT 39, their application in safety-critical
domains remains dif ﬁcult due to the low tolerance for issues like
hallucinations40. The dense learning approach opens the door for
leveraging AI techniques in the development of such systems. In this
Table 1 | Evaluation results of ablation studies
Episodic data
densiﬁcation
State-level data
densiﬁcation
Near-miss
episodes
Retrospective data
densiﬁcation
Trajectory
resampling
State
reconnection
C r a s hr a t ei nN D E
after 780 training
steps ( × 10/C05 )
C r a s hr a t ei nN D E
after 1650 train-
ing steps ( × 10/C05 )
ww w w w w 1 . 0 7 0 . 6 5
w/o w w w w w 2.26 2.00
w w/o w w w w 3.60 3.31
w w w/o w w w 1.71 1.22
w w w w/o w w 1.93 0.90
w w w/o w/o w w 3.56 3.27
ww w w w / o w 2 . 1 9 0 . 7 7
ww w w w w / o 1 . 3 4 0 . 9 4
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-69761-x
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:3163 5
work, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in the safe
driving task of AVs and enable continuous enhancement of AVs ’ per-
formance in rare safety-critical scenarios (see Supplementary Fig. 8).
More research is needed to extend our approach to more generic
safety-critical autonomous systems. We note that how to apply the
dense learning idea to supervised learning needs to be further
investigated.
While AV companies have already collected a large amount of
data, strategies for effectively utilizing this data to enhance AV safety
performance remains unclear. Due to the rarity of safety-critical
events, the information of these events is usually hidden within a vast
amount of noisy data. One might think that this issue could be resolved
by focusing on a small set of data related to these rare events. How-
ever, prior to this study, there was no theoretical foundation sup-
porting this intuition, which greatly limited its effectiveness and could
even lead to misleading results. Our dense learning approach addres-
ses this challenge with a thorough theoretical analysis for
deﬁning, identifying, and effectively leveraging the set of informative
data. This is particularly signi ﬁcant considering AVs rely on larger
neural networks and require more informative data for effective
training.
A limitation of our work lies in the focus primarily on moving
objects and road geometry of driving environment
41, which are crucial
factors in ﬂuencing AV decision-making. Addressing the CoR chal-
lenges associated with additional driving environment factors (such as
weather conditions) and internal AV factors
42 necessitates further
exploration. We are conﬁdent in the extensibility of our approach to
consider these factors by incorporating domain knowledge from
relevant ﬁelds. Moreover, as demonstrated in Fig. 2a, our approach
seamlessly integrates with existing rules (such as RSS) or model-based
approaches, offering compatibility and the potential to leverage
established techniques for managing diverse driving environment
factors.
We note that our approach cannot address unknown unsafe issues
that are not included in any training dataset or reinforcement learning
environment. For these issues, our approach needs to be integrated
with other techniques. For example, one potential way is to generate
such scenarios with generative methods
43, while another way is to
Singaporea Las Vegas Boston Pittsburgh
b
PDM-Hybrid
Input scene
Propose trajectory Calculate offset
Time to collision > 2.0s
Time to collision
Attention-based
state dropout
encoder
Dense learning
based agent
SafeDriver
Ego vehicle states without history
Other traffic participants states
Map and traffic light status
Generate path
Emergency path
Yes
No
8.7s
 8.7s
9.6s
 9.6sc d
SafeDriver action:
hard brake
e
 9.2s
 9.2sf
11.0s
SafeDriver action:
stop in advance
11.0s
Fig. 3 | Performance evaluation of the dense learning approach on the nuPlan
benchmark. a Illustration of the four cities in the nuPlan benchmark where we
evaluated the performance of our approach.b Architecture of the PDM-Hybrid with
SafeDriver. SafeDriver uses an attention-based state dropout encoder and gen-
erates 8-second trajectories for vehicle control.c– f Two cases to demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach. The ego vehicle is depicted by a white rectangle.
When controlled by SafeDriver, the ego vehicle is highlighted with a red circle.
Other vehicles are shown using green rectangles, while pedestrians are represented
by blue rectangles. The expert trajectory is marked by an orange curve. c When
controlled by the base model, the ego vehicle proceeds straight ahead and collides
with a vehicle turning right that does not yield. d In the same scenario, SafeDriver
executes a hard brake to avoid the potential collision.e The base model directs the
ego vehicle through a crosswalk, resulting in a collision with pedestrians.f In the
same scenario, when encountering pedestrians, SafeDriver executes a proactive
yielding, providing enough space to avoid the crash.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-69761-x
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:3163 6
search such scenarios with falsiﬁcation techniques14. Our approach is
complementary to these techniques. Moreover, the falsiﬁcation tech-
niques can also be utilized in the counterfactual simulation. There are
also works attempting to guarantee the safety of AV for all situations,
like provably safe reinforcement learning
31,32, yet they usually rely upon
assumptions with the environment model19 such as behaviors of other
trafﬁc participants and vehicle dynamics. For example, reachable set
calculations are often based on max vehicle acceleration/deceleration
rate, which might be impacted by road surface conditions under dif-
ferent weather conditions that are difﬁcult to predict precisely.
Methods
F o r m u l a t i o no fA Vt r a i n i n gp r o b l e m
This section describes the formulation of the AV training problem.
Denote the variables of the driving environment as
X = ½Sð0Þ, Að0Þ, Sð1Þ, Að1Þ, /C1/C1/C1, SðTÞ/C138 2Ω,w h e r eSðkÞ denotes the states
(position, speed, heading, etc.) of the AV and surrounding background
vehicles or other road users at the k th time step, AðkÞ denotes the
maneuvers of surrounding background vehicles or other road users at
the k th time step, T denotes the total time steps of each driving
episode, and Ω denotes the space of the variables X.T h eg o a lo fA V
training is to optimize the AV policy π 2 Π as
max
π2Π
EPπ
½f ðπ, XÞ/C138, ð2Þ
where f ð/C1Þdenotes the objective function of AV training andX follows
an underlying joint distribution Pπ ðXÞ in NDE. To keep the notation
simple, we leave it implicit in all cases that π is a function of neural
network parameters θ. For safety training, the objective could be
minimizing the overall crash rate as
min
π2Π
EPπ
½Pðω XðÞ =1 Þ/C138 ð3Þ
where ω XðÞ = 1 denotes the objective event (e.g., vehicle crash), and
Pðω XðÞ =1 Þ denotes the event probability of the AV policy π in the
driving environmentX.
f
t=20.8s t=21.8s
t=204.8s t=206.2s t=208.0s
t=20.0s
SafeDriver action:
1. Braking hard
2. Steering left
SafeDriver action:
1. Braking hard
2. Steering right
d
0.0
0.6
1.2
1.8Crash rate in field tests
0.0
0.6
1.2
1.8
Our approach
Base AV model
Rear-end Sideswipe Angle Head-on
97.3% 70.5%
90.0%
89.8%
0.0
0.6
1.2
Base AV
model
Our
approach
98.8%
90.1%
Base AV
model
Our
approach
Base AV
model
Our
approach
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
Crash rate in simulation
90.0%
e
Mixed reality
c
Traffic lights
Proxy
Traffic lights
Virtual vehicles
Proxy
Real world
Lidar
RTK GPS
Bywire
controller
On-board
computer
a b
Camera
HD map
Roundabout
Signalized
intersections
Unprotected
left-turn
Roundabout Straightaway
Testing route
×10-6
Crash rate in field tests
Avoidable crash rate
×10-6 ×10-6
×10-6
Virtual world
AV
Fig. 4 | Performance evaluation for a real-world AV at a physical test track.
a Illustration of the real autonomous vehicle (AV) under test, equipped with
Autoware, Lidar, cameras, on-board computer, by-wire controller, high-deﬁnition
(HD) map, and RTK (Real-Time Kinematics) GPS (Global Positioning System).
b Illustration of the Mcity test track including highways, roundabouts, intersec-
tions, urban streets, etc.c Illustration of the mixed-reality environment combining
the physical road infrastructures, proxy physical objects, and a simulation envir-
onment, where information of the real world and simulation world is synchronized.
d Safety performances of SafeDriver in the co-simulation of SUMO and Autoware at
Mcity. e Field testing results of the real AV with SafeDriver regarding the overall
crash rate, crash rates of different crash types, and the avoidable crash rate.f Cases
of SafeDriver for avoiding crashes in safety-critical situations. In theﬁrst case, the
SafeDriver (red vehicle) made emergency braking with right steering to avoid
collisions in the situation that the background vehicle in the right lane made a
reckless cut-in, while the vehicle from the opposite direction was approaching. In
the second case, the SafeDriver (red vehicle) made emergency braking with left
steering to avoid collisions in the situation that a background vehicle failed to yield
when entering the roundabout. Additional explanations are available in Supple-
mentary Videos 7−8.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-69761-x
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:3163 7
Curse of rarity for AV training
To solve the AV training problem, deep learning approaches have been
widely applied to handle the high variability and complexity ofX.T h e
key is to estimate the policy gradient at each training step for the
current policy π as
Ψ =
def
EPπ
∇π Pðω XðÞ =1 Þ
/C2/C3
, ð4Þ
where Ψ 2 Rd , d is the dimension of the gradient, and then the policy
could be updated accordingly. For non-trivial AV policies, however,
since the objective event ω XðÞ = 1 is a rare event, namely,
E
Pπ
½Pðω XðÞ =1 Þ/C138is a near-zero value, most Pðω Xi
/C0/C1
=1 Þ and
∇ π Pðω Xi
/C0/C1
=1 Þ are near zero. Therefore, estimating the policy gradient
is essentially a rare-event estimation problem. If directly using the data
collected in NDE, it is essentially a Monte Carlo estimation approach
44
as
bΨMC =
def 1
n
Xn
i =1
∇ π Pðω Xi
/C0/C1
=1 Þ, Xi /C24Pπ Xi
/C0/C1
, ð5Þ
where n is the number of samples used at each training step, and
∇ π Pðω Xi
/C0/C1
=1 Þ could be estimated through the policy gradient
theorem45. According to the properties of Monte Carlo estimation 44,
however, the estimator bΨMC would suffer from a large variance, which
severely hinders the learning effectiveness. Moreover, as bΨMC is
usually near zero, the signal-to-noise ratio is also low, which makes the
problem even worse. We call this problem the CoR
7.
Let us elaborate the CoR more rigorously. Without loss of gen-
erality, we deﬁne the set of non-informative samples asΦnon /C26Ω and
informative samples as Φin /C26Ω, their indicator functions IΦnon
and
IΦin
, and an estimator of the policy gradient Ψ that only utilizes the
informative samples as
bΨin =
def 1
n
Xn
i =1
∇π Pðω Xi
/C0/C1
=1 ÞIΦin
, Xi /C24Pπ Xi
/C0/C1
, ð6Þ
Then we have the following Lemma 1, and the proof can be found
in ref. 7.
Lemma 1
If Φnon and Φin satisfy the following conditions:
(1) Φnon\Φin = +, Φnon ∪ Φin = Ω;
(2) EPπ
½∇ π Pðω ðXÞ =1 ÞIΦnon
/C138= 0;
then we have the following properties:
(1) EPπ
bΨMC
hi
= EPπ
bΨin
hi
;
(2) σ2
Pπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
MCÞ ≥ σ2
Pπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
in Þ, 8k =1 , ... d;a n d
(3) σ2
Pπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
MCÞ ≥ ρ/C01
Φin
σ2
Pπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
in Þ, 8k =1 , ... d, with the assumption
EPπ
G2
k ðω XðÞ =1 ÞIΦin
hi
= EPπ
G2
k ðω XðÞ =1 Þ
hi
EPπ
IΦin
hi
, 8k =1 , ... , d ð7Þ
where bΨ
ðkÞ
MC and bΨ
ðkÞ
in are k th components of bΨMC and bΨin,r e s p e c t i v e l y ,
ρΦin
= EPπ
ðIΦin
Þ2½ 0, 1/C138is the expected proportion of the informative
samples Φin in all samples with the sampling distribution Pπ ðXÞ,
and Gðω XðÞ =1 Þdef = ∇π Pðω XðÞ =1 Þ is a random vector with
Gðω XðÞ =1 Þ = ½G1ðω XðÞ =1 Þ, ... , Gd ðω XðÞ =1 Þ/C138 2Rd ,w h e r e d is the
dimension of the parameters of the policy network π.
Remark 1. For AV safety training, the proportion of informative
samples in all samples could be very small, in the order of 10/C04 /C2410/C06
or fewer, due to the rarity of safety-critical events in NDE. As the policy
gradient ∇ π Pðω XðÞ =1 Þ is mainly determined by the parameters of
neural networks, it could exhibit a stationary uncertainty that is inde-
pendent of the set Φ
in. This is particularly true at the beginning of the
learning process when the parameters are relatively random. Conse-
quently, the assumption in Property 2 of Lemma 1 could be
approximately satisﬁed, particularly at the beginning of the learning
process. Therefore, the estimation variance of the traditional deep
learning approaches based on Monte Carlo estimation could be
very large.
Remark 2. Lemma 1 also indicates that if the set of informative
samples Φ
in could be identiﬁed, estimating the policy gradient utiliz-
ing only the informative samples has great potential to reduce the
learning variance without loss of unbiasedness, thereby overcoming
the CoR. However, how to de ﬁne, identify, and effectively leverage
informative samples for AV safety training is challenging. Prior to this
work, this process is largely intuitive, for instance, many existing
approaches only emphasize the crash event data or falsi ﬁed cases
14,
discussed as follows.
Learning from crash only
Many existing approaches used to tackle the CoR challenge primarily
focus on learning from the data where AVs fail. To be more speciﬁc, the
estimator of these approaches can be represented as
bΨ
Fail =
def 1
n
Xn
i =1
∇ π Pðω XðÞ =1 ÞIΦF
, Xi /C24Pπ Xi
/C0/C1
ð8Þ
where Ið/C1Þis an indicator function and ΦF is the set of data samples
where AV fails. However, these approaches are largely intuitive without
theoretical foundation. Consequently, the deﬁnition of the setΦ
F does
not satisfy the conditions of Φin in Lemma 1, resulting in a severe
learning biasedness, that is,
EPπ
bΨFail
hi
≠EPπ
bΨMC
hi
: ð9Þ
Without the unbiasedness guaranteed, the learning process could
become misleading. That is the reason why learning-from-crash-only
could suffer from the seesaw effect as illustrated in Supplementary
Section 2.3 of Supplementary Information.
Dense learning approach for AV training
In this work, we propose the dense learning approach to overcome the
CoR challenge for AV training. The key to dense learning is to de ﬁne
and identify the informative data samples for AV safety training,
satisfying the conditions of Φ
in in Lemma 1. To achieve this goal, we
integrate the Lemma 1 with importance sampling theory to derive the
optimal distribution of data samples. Although this optimal distribu-
tion is unavailable in practice, it provides guidance of de ﬁning and
identifying the informative data for AV training. Then, we sampled the
data based on the distribution, rejected the non-informative samples,
and effectively leveraged the informative ones, resulting in the dense
learning approach for AV training.
First, we derive the optimal sampling distribution q
/C3
π XðÞ and the
corresponding policy estimatorbΨ
/C3
IS based on the importance sampling
theory27,44,46 as
bΨ
/C3
IS =
def 1
n
Xn
i =1
Pπ Xi
/C0/C1
q/C3
π Xi
/C0/C1 ∇ π Pðω Xi
/C0/C1
=1 Þ
"#
, Xi /C24q/C3
π Xi
/C0/C1
, ð10Þ
q/C3
π XðÞ / j j ∇π Pðω XðÞ =1 Þjj2Pπ XðÞ , ð11Þ
where ‖⋅‖2 denotes thel2 norm of the vector, and the symbol/ means
‘ proportional to’ . Equation ( 10) provides the insights that the most
informative data for AV training should contain all safety-critical
events, both successful and failed, with probabilities proportional to
their contributions to the AVs’ policy gradient as well as their exposure
frequencies in the real world. The major challenge of bΨ
/C3
IS is that
jj∇π Pðω XðÞ =1 Þjj2 cannot be accurately calculated for each episodeX in
practice and is dependent of the policyπ, which is changing during the
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-69761-x
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:3163 8
training process. Some existing studies tried to calculate∇ π Pðω XðÞ =1 Þ
using the policy gradient theorem (see ref. 47 for example), which
introduces additional constraints and severely limits the effectiveness
and applicability of the approach.
To address this challenge, we propose to utilize Eqs. (9)a n d(10)
as a guidance to de ﬁne and identify the informative samples for the
dense learning approach. Therefore, instead of trying to calculate the
exact values with severely limited applicability, we choose to estimate
jj∇
π Pðω XðÞ =1 Þjj2 as a classi ﬁcation task. Speci ﬁcally, we estimate
jj∇π Pðω XðÞ =1 Þjj2 as
jj∇ π Pðω XðÞ =1 Þjj2 /C25IX2Φ =
def 1, X2Φ
0, X=2Φ
/C26
, ð12Þ
Φ =
def
X2Ω : Iðω XðÞ =1 Þ =1 and P ðω XðÞ =1 Þ <1 orIðω XðÞ =1 Þ
/C8
=0 and Pðω XðÞ =1 Þ >0
/C9
,
where an avoidability analysis is conducted to approximate if a crash is
avoidable ( Pðω XðÞ =1 Þ < 1), and a safety metric was selected to
approximate if a non-crash is a near-miss (Pðω XðÞ =1 Þ >0 ) .S p e c iﬁcally,
we identiﬁed a crash event as avoidable if an evasive trajectory is still
feasible after the vehicle state is being identiﬁed as safety-critical (see
Supplementary Section 2.8 in Supplementary Information). And we
identiﬁed a non-crash event as a near-miss if the minimum relative
distance between the AV and background vehicles is below a pre-
determined threshold (that is, 2.5 m). A sensitivity analysis of the
threshold can be found in Supplementary Fig. 6.
Then, we obtain the estimator according to Eq. (9)a s
bΨ
IS =
def 1
n
Xn
i =1
∇π Pðω Xi
/C0/C1
=1 Þ, Xi /C24bqπ Xi
/C0/C1
, ð13Þ
where
bqπ Xi
/C0/C1
=
def IXi 2Φ
PN
i =1 IXi 2Φ Pπ Xi
/C0/C1 Pπ Xi
/C0/C1
: ð14Þ
Here N denotes the total amount of data in the collected dataset.
We then have Theorem 1, and the proof can be found in Supple-
mentary Section 2.1.3 of Supplementary Information.
Theorem 1
The estimatorbΨIS has the following properties:
(1) E^qπ
½ bΨIS/C138= g/C01
N EPπ
½ bΨMC/C138;
(2) bΨIS = bΨMC;
(3) Δ2
^qπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
IS Þ ≤ gN Δ2
Pπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
MCÞ, 8k =1 , ... d;
(4) Δ2
^qπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
IS Þ ≤ gN ρΦ Δ2
Pπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
MCÞ, 8k =1 , ... d,w i t ht h ea s s u m p t i o n
EPπ
G2
k ðω XðÞ =1 ÞIX2Φ
hi
= EPπ
G2
k ðω XðÞ =1 Þ
hi
EPπ
IX2Φ
/C2/C3
, 8k =1 , ... , d
ð15Þ
where gN =
def PN
i =1 IXi 2Φ Pπ ðXi Þ2ð 0, 1/C138, bΨ
kðÞ
IS is the k th components of
bΨIS, Δbqπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
IS Þ =
def
σ^qπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
IS Þ=Ebqπ
½ bΨ
ðkÞ
IS /C138and ΔPπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
MCÞ =
def
σPπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
MCÞ=EPπ
½ bΨ
ðkÞ
MC/C138are coefﬁcients of variation, and ρΦ =
def
EPπ
½IX2Φ /C1382½0, 1/C138is the
expected proportion of the informative samplesΦ in all samples with
the sampling distributionPπ ðXÞ.
Remark 4.T h e ﬁrst property of Theorem 1 ensures the unbiased-
ness of AV training regarding the direction of the gradient, which is
critical for overcoming the seesaw effect. We note thatg
N is a constant
and as the learning rate is usually adjustable, such a constant will not
affect the learning process.
Remark 5. The second property indicates that the new estimator
bΨIS has the same calculation equation as the Monte Carlo estimator
bΨMC (see Eqs. (4)a n d(12)), and the only difference is the data sampling
distribution. This is signi ﬁcant as our approach could leverage all
techniques that can be used for the Monte Carlo estimator (that is
widely used for deep learning), without introducing any additional
limitations. Therefore, our approach could leverage the advances in
deep learning but with a dramatically smaller learning variance, which
ensures the effectiveness and applicability of our approach.
Remark 6. The third and fourth properties are obtained as Φ is a
realization of de ﬁning and identifying the informative samples for
the AV safety training task. Therefore, as indicated in Lemma 1, the
coefﬁcient of variation of bΨ
IS is dramstically smaller than that of the
Monte Carlo approach. Moreover, bΨIS is an approximation of bΨ
/C3
IS
that has the minimum variance. Both indicate that bΨIS is an ef ﬁcient
policy gradient estimator for deep learning approaches associated
with rare events. As the parameters of neural networks are usually
randomly initialized, the assumption in Eq. ( 14) could be approxi-
mately satisﬁed, particularly at the beginning of the learning process,
as discussed in Remark 1.
Remark 7. While the following investigation focuses on the deep
reinforcement learning (DRL) tasks of AV safety training, Theorem 1 is
also applicable to more generic deep learning tasks. Therefore, our
approach has the great potential to address the CoR challenge in
generic deep learning tasks associated with rare events.
To further integrate the estimator bΨ
IS with DRL approaches, we
obtain the policy gradient estimator of DRL as
bΨDRL =
def bQπ St , At
/C0/C1 ∇ π At jSt
/C0/C1
π At jSt
/C0/C1 , St , At
/C0/C1
/C24Pπ XðÞ , ð16Þ
where St and At are samples of the state and action following the
distribution of episodes Pπ XðÞ and under the policy π, Qπ St , At
/C0/C1
denotes the state-action value,bQπ St , At
/C0/C1
is an unbiased estimation of
Qπ St , At
/C0/C1
,i . e . ,Eπ bQπ St , At
/C0/C1hi
= Qπ St , At
/C0/C1
. As discussed in Remark 5,
our approach is compatible with existing techniques that can be used
for the Monte Carlo estimator. Therefore, we integrate the estimator
bΨIS with the dense deep reinforcement learning (D2RL) approach that
was developed in our previous study for AV testing8. Although the AV
training problem is different from the AV testing problem, the D2RL
approach can still be beneﬁcial to further reduce the learning variance
by removing the non-safety-critical states and connecting the safety-
critical ones. Therefore, we obtain a new estimator as
bΨ
Dense =
def bQπ St , At
/C0/C1 ∇π At jSt
/C0/C1
π At jSt
/C0/C1 ISt 2Sc
, ðSt , At Þ/C24bqπ XðÞ , ð17Þ
where Sc =
def
sjEπ qπ s, aðÞ
/C0/C1
≠qπ s, aðÞ , 9a
/C8/C9
denotes the set of safety-
critical states as deﬁned in ref. 8 In this study, we utilized the learned
safety metric to identify the safety-critical states.
We then have Theorem 2, and the proof can be found in Supple-
mentary Section 2.1.7 of Supplementary Information.
Theorem 2
The estimator bΨDense has the following properties:
(1) E^qπ
½ bΨDense/C138= g/C01
N EPπ
½ bΨDRL/C138;
(2) Δ2
^qπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
DenseÞ ≤ gN Δ2
Pπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
DRLÞ, 8k =1 , ... d;
(3) Δ2
^qπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
DenseÞ ≤ gN ρΦ Δ2
Pπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
DenseÞ, 8k =1 , ... d, with the assumption
in Eq. (14);
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-69761-x
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:3163 9
(4) Δ2
bqπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
DenseÞ ≤ gN ρΦD
Δ2
Pπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
DRLÞ, 8k =1 , ... d, with the assumption
EPπ
bΨ
kðÞ
DRL
/C18/C19 2
IX2ΦD
"#
= EPπ
bΨ
kðÞ
DRL
/C18/C19 2"#
EPπ
IX2ΦD
hi
, 8k =1 , ... , d
ð18Þ
where bΨ
kðÞ
Dense and bΨ
kðÞ
DRL are k th components of bΨDense and bΨDRL,
respectively, Δbqπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
DenseÞ =
def
σbqπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
DenseÞ=Ebqπ
½ bΨ
ðkÞ
Dense/C138, ΔPπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
DRLÞ =
def
σPπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
DRLÞ=EPπ
½ bΨ
ðkÞ
DRL/C138, ΔPπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
DenseÞ =
def
σPπ
ð bΨ
ðkÞ
DenseÞ=EPπ
½ bΨ
ðkÞ
Dense/C138are coefﬁ-
cients of variance, and ρΦD
=
def
EPπ
ðIΦD
Þ2½ 0, 1/C138is the expected pro-
portion of the informative statesΦD =
def
fSt 2 X : St 2Scand X 2 Φg in all
sampled states with the sampling distribution Pπ (X) and under the
policy π.
Remark 8. Theorem 2 indicates that bΨDense is an unbiased and
efﬁcient policy gradient estimator of the DRL approaches, which is
critical for overcoming the seesaw effect and CoR for AV training. As
ρΦD
is smaller than ρΦ ,t h ee s t i m a t o rbΨDense could further reduce the
variance of policy gradient, compared with the estimator bΨDRL
Remark 9 . As the policy gradient bΨDRL =
def bQπ ðSt , At Þ ∇ πðAt jSt Þ
πðAt jSt Þ is
mainly determined by the parameters of neural networks, it could
exhibit a stationary uncertainty that is independent of the setΦ
D.T h i s
is particularly true at the beginning of the learning process when the
parameters are relatively random. Therefore, the assumptions in (17)
could be approximately satisﬁed. We note that the assumptions are
primarily for the theoretical analysis to be clean and are not strictly
required in practice.
Additional data densiﬁcation approaches
Ofﬂine resample mechanism . To realize the estimator bΨDRL,w e
design an ofﬂine resampling mechanism to resample and redistribute
the collected episodic data according to the distributionbqπ Xi
/C0/C1
as in
Eq. (13). An avoidability analysis was developed to help approximate
the distribution bqπ Xi
/C0/C1
. This mechanism is applicable for data col-
lected through different venues such as simulations, test tracks, and
public roads. It also provides compatibility to integrate with purposely
generated testing environments (such as ITE) where data is collected
by a different distribution, and only the ofﬂine resampling distribution
needs to be modiﬁed accordingly.
Learned safety metric . Most existing safety metrics are primarily
based on trajectory prediction of background road users with
assumptions on their driving behaviors, which limit their effectiveness
and generalization capability. This is particularly true for AV safety
training, as the AV policy is changing during the training process. To
address this issue, we designed a learned safety metric to identify the
safety-critical states with both high precision and recall rates. We uti-
lized the avoidability analysis approach to provide ground-truth labels
for the large-scale naturalistic trajectory datasets. Speci ﬁcally, all
snapshots where a crash is unavoidable with evasive driving behaviors
are labeled as positive, while others are labeled as negative. Since
unavoidable snapshots are rare, existing training approaches suffer
from the severely unbalanced data issue
48. Instead of rebalancing the
data before the training, we proposed to resample positive and
negative snapshots from all the data to create balanced training data
batches in each training step. In this way, the training data in each
training step is rebalanced and densiﬁed. Results demonstrate that our
approach enables a much better precision and recall performance than
existing safety metrics (see Supplementary Fig. 1).
Retrospective data densiﬁcation. Ideally, as the policy π is changing
during the training process, the episodic data should be re-collected
according to the new policy at each training step. However, this is
severely inefﬁcient and even infeasible in practice, particularly for on-
road data collection. Therefore, an off-policy mechanism is needed to
ﬁll the policy gap. In this study, we design a retrospective data densi-
ﬁcation mechanism to re-evaluate th e collected data for SafeDriver
through a counterfactual simulation. This mechanism could update
the values of Iðω XðÞ =1 Þ and Pðω XðÞ =1 Þ in Eq. (11), so the data resam-
pling distribution bq
π Xi
/C0/C1
could be updated for the new AV policy,
which reduces the overall policy gap.
Counterfactual simulation . We utilized the counterfactual
simulation49 to re-evaluate the safety performance of the AV policy and
collect the training data. In each simulation, the base AV model with
SafeDriver is responsible for the planning task of the simulated AV.
SafeDriver handles all the safety-critical states identiﬁed by the learned
safety metric; otherwise, the base AV model takes control. Calibrated
non-linear bicycle models are used to simulate the motion of the AV
with control command (i.e., steering angle and acceleration) inputs
from the planning tasks. Speciﬁcally, we employed the dynamic bicycle
model when AV speed is greater than 20 m/s and the kinematic bicycle
model for other cases, leveraging their modeling strengthens for dif-
ferent situations
48. The trajectories of the background vehicles are
replayed based on the recorded data until the recorded trajectories
reach their end. For crash trajectories, if SafeDriver could avoid the
original collision in the counterfactual simulation, we need to re-
simulate the driving behaviors of the background vehicles after the
original collision moment to interact with SafeDriver, until the collision
could be avoided completely or a new collision occurs. Speciﬁcally, we
simulated the background vehicles by a prede ﬁned driving model,
such as the IDM and SL2015 provided by SUMO
35.T h es i m u l a t i o nw i l l
be terminated either upon collision or after a certain duration has
elapsed.
Intelligent testing environment for efﬁcient data collection
As jj∇ π Pðω XðÞ =1 Þjj2 is zero for most episodic dataX and non-trivial AV
policies π, most data collected in NDE has little information for AV
training and will be rejected by the ofﬂine sampling mechanism as Eq.
(13). To improve the data collection ef ﬁciency, we utilized the intelli-
gent testing environment (ITE) that was developed in our previous
study8, in that AI-based background agents are trained to test AVs in an
accelerated mode. Speciﬁcally, ITE will provide a dataset with a new
distribution X/C24qITEðXÞ, each episode of data with a weight
W ITE XðÞ = Pπ ðXÞ=qITEðXÞ, which contains much more valuable safety-
critical episodes. To leverage this dataset, the safety-critical episodes
are resampled by the distribution proportional to their weights
W
ITE XðÞ and then resampled according to Eq. (13). We found out that,
with the dense learning approach, ITE could accelerate the collection
of safety-critical data by multiple orders of magnitude, which drama-
tically accelerates the training process of AVs ’ overall safety perfor-
mance (see Supplementary Fig. 2). We believe that this approach opens
the door for integrating AV testing and training together, accelerating
both ﬁelds, which deserves further investigation.
Training settings of dense learning
We implemented the dense learning approach in highways, round-
abouts, and urban environments, respectively. To keep theﬁdelity and
efﬁciency of the simulations, we utilized the NDE simulation and ITE as
described in Supplementary Sections 2.6 and 2.7 of Supplementary
Information. We applied the PPO algorithm developed on the RLLIB
1.11.0 platform
50 to parallelly train SafeDriver on 400 CPU cores and
2800 GB memory high-performance computation cluster at the Uni-
versity of Michigan, Ann Arbor. We created a three-layer fully con-
nected neural network, consisting of 256 neurons in each layer, to
represent the SafeDriver. The neural network received input data
comprising the states of up to 6 background vehicles located within
3 0 mf r o mt h eA V ,w h e r ei t so u t p u ti st h eA V’ s acceleration and
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-69761-x
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:3163 10
steering angle. Speciﬁcally, for the highway environment, the accel-
eration spanned from−4 m/s² to 2 m/s², and the steering angle varied
between -10 degrees and 10 degrees; for roundabout environments,
the acceleration ranged from −8 m/s² to 4.5 m/s², and the steering
angle covered a range from −45 degrees to 45 degrees; and for the
urban environment, the acceleration exhibited a range between−7m /
s² and 2.5 m/s², while the steering angle was within the−10 degrees to
1 0d e g r e e sr a n g e .W es e tt h el e a r n i n gr a t ea s1 0
−5 and the discount
factor as 0.99. In each training iteration, a total of 50,000 timesteps
were used to train the neural network for 30 times. For each driving
episode, the reward function is set as−1 for an AV-involved crash and 0
for others.
Field testing settings
Autonomous vehicle with SafeDriver . The vehicle under test is a
Lincoln MKZ hybrid from Mcity at the University of Michigan, equip-
ped with various sensors, including OTXS RT3003 RTK GPS, PointGrey
camera, Velodyne 32 channel LiDAR, Delphi radars, Xsens MTi GPS/
IMU, etc. The AV also had the Nuvo-8208GC computer and the
Dataspeed drive-by-wire system installed. We applied the open-source
full-stack autonomous driving system, Autoware
25,a st h eb a s eA V
model. Speci ﬁcally, after receiving the ego vehicle ’ sp o s i t i o na n d
velocity as well as background vehicles’ information, the future path is
generated based on OpenPlanner 1.1351. We applied the pure pursuit
algorithm to convert the planned trajectory into the velocity and yaw
rate and then used a proportional-integral-derivative controller pro-
vided by DataSpeed Inc. to further convert them into the vehicle by-
wire control commands, that is, steering angle, throttle, and brake
percentages. When the learned safety metric alerts in safety-critical
situations, SafeDriver receives the normalized observation and out-
puts the steering angle and acceleration, which are further converted
to the throttle and brake percentages.
Mixed reality testing environment . We applied the mixed reality
testing environment
52 to efﬁciently evaluate the safety performance of
AVs at Mcity, which is one of the leading testing facilities for AV
development. We forwarded the states of the background vehicles
from the simulation world and the signal information from the physical
testing track to the AV through the Internet. Simultaneously, the states
of the AV as well as proxy objects and the signal information were
synchronized into the simulation world, and the behaviors of virtual
background vehicles were determined according to NDE or ITE.
Besides, the virtual background vehicles were rendered and blended
on the front camera’ s view using pyrender
53. To accelerate the testing
process for evaluating the crash rates of the AV in NDE, we utilized the
ITE that was developed in our previous study
8.Af r a m e w o r ko ft h e
mixed reality testing framework can be found in Supplementary Fig. 7.
Data availability
The raw datasets that we used for modeling the naturalistic driving
environment come from the Safety Pilot Model Deployment (SPMD)
program
54 and the Integrated Vehicle Based Safety System (IVBSS)55 at
the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, as well as the RounD dataset33.
These raw datasets are subject to the data access policies and licensing
terms of their respective providers and are therefore not redistributed
by the authors. Access to the SPMD and IVBSS datasets can be
requested from the University of Michigan Transportation Research
Institute, and access to the RounD dataset is available through its
original repository, subject to the corresponding usage agreements.
The processed data generated in this study, which constitute the
minimum dataset necessary to interpret, verify, and extend the ﬁnd-
ings reported in this article, have been deposited in the Zenodo
repository and are publicly available at: https://zenodo.org/records/
12735037. Source data supporting the ﬁgures and analyses presented
in this paper are provided via Zenodo at: https://zenodo.org/records/
12784827. To further illustrate the methodology and qualitative per-
formance of the proposed approach, a collection of Supplementary
Videos is provided. All Supplementary Videos, including high-
resolution ﬁles, are publicly available through Zenodo at https://
zenodo.org/records/14837884. These videos demonstrate the learning
paradigms, the learned safety metric, the intelligent testing environ-
ment, and the performance of SafeDriver across simulated and real-
world scenarios, including highway, roundabout, and Mcity test track
environments, as well as case studies on the nuPlan benchmark.
Code availability
The simulation software SUMO, the NDE models, the intelligent testing
environment, the automated driving system Autoware, and the RLLib
platform with the implemented PPO algorithm are publicly available,
as described in the text and the relevant references
8,25,35,50,56. The source
codes for the dense learning approach for SafeDriver is available at:
https://zenodo.org/records/12735669 with the https://doi.org/10.
5281/zenodo.12735668.
References
1. “Science: Radio Auto”. Time Magazine. Aug 10, 1925. https://time.
com/archive/6653944/science-radio-auto/(2013).
2. Hirsch, J. Reality check: $160 billion can ’t get autonomous vehicles
on road, Automotive News. Automotive News,https://www.
autonews.com/mobility-report/autonomous-vehicle-reality-check-
after-160-billion-spent(2022).
3. Society of Automotive Engineers. Taxonomy and De ﬁnitions for
Terms Related to Driving Automation Systems for On-Road Motor
Vehicles, https://www.sae.org/standards/content/j3016_
202104/ (2021).
4. Thadani, T. How a robotaxi crash got Cruise ’s self-driving cars
pulled from Californian roads, Washington Post,https://www.
washingtonpost.com/technology/2023/10/28/robotaxi-cruise-
crash-driverless-car-san-francisco/(2023).
5. Shladover, S. E. & Nowakowski, C. Regulatory challenges for road
vehicle automation: lessons from the California experience.Transp.
Res. Part A Policy Pr. 122,1 2 5–133 (2019).
6 . Z h a n g ,Y . ,K a n g ,B . ,H o o i ,B . ,Y a n ,S .&F e n g ,J .D e e pl o n g - t a i l e d
learning: a survey. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.45,
10795–10816 (2023).
7. Liu, H. X. & Feng, S. Curse of rarity for autonomous vehicles. Nat.
Commun. 15, 4808 (2024).
8. Feng, S. et al. Dense reinforcement learning for safety validation of
autonomous vehicles.Nature 615,6 2 0–627 (2023).
9. Mnih, V. et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement
learning. Nature 518,5 2 9–533 (2015).
10. Silver, D. et al. Mastering the game of go without human knowl-
edge. Nature 550,3 5 4–359 (2017).
11. Brown, N. & Sandholm, T. Superhuman AI for multiplayer poker.
Science 365, 885–890 (2019).
12. Wurman, P. R. et al. Outracing champion Gran Turismo drivers with
deep reinforcement learning.Nature 602, 223–228 (2022).
13. Cummings, M. L. Rethinking the maturity of arti ﬁcial intelligence in
safety-critical settings.AI Mag. 42,6 –15 (2021).
14. Menghi, C. et al. ARCH-COMP 2023 category report: falsiﬁ
cation. In
Proceedings of 10th International Workshop on Applied Veriﬁcation
of Continuous and Hybrid Systems,V o l .96, (International Federa-
tion of Automatic Control (IFAC), 2023).
15. Karpathy, A., Tesla Inc. System and method for obtaining training
data. U.S. Patent Application 17/250,825 (2021).
16. Stocker, T. F. The seesaw effect. Science 282,6 1–62 (1998).
17. Tang, H., Liu, J., Zhao, M. & Gong, X. Progressive layered extraction
(PLE): a novel multi-task learning (MTL) model for personalized
recommendations. InProceedings of the 14th ACM Conference on
Recommender Systems,2 6 9–278 (ACM, 2020).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-69761-x
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:3163 11
18. Zheng, S. et al. GPT-Fathom: benchmarking large language models
to decipher Q12 the evolutionary path towards GPT-4 and beyond.
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL
2024 (2024).
19. Seshia, S. A., Sadigh, D. & Sastry, S. S. Toward veri ﬁed artiﬁcial
intelligence.Commun. ACM 65,4 6–55 (2022).
20. Pek, C., Manzinger, S., Koschi, M. & Althoff, M. Using online ver-
iﬁcation to prevent autonomous vehicles from causing accidents.
Nat. Mach. Intell. 2,5 1 8–528 (2020).
21. Krasowski, H. et al. Provably safe reinforcement learning: con-
ceptual analysis, survey, and benchmarking. Preprint athttps://
arxiv.org/abs/2205.06750(2022).
22. Brunke, L. et al. Safe learning in robotics: from learning-based
control to safe reinforcement learning.Ann. Rev. Control Robot.
Autonomous Syst.5,4 1 1–444 (2022).
23. Cao, Z. et al. Continuous improvement of self-driving cars using
dynamic conﬁdence-aware reinforcement learning.Nat. Mach.
Intell. 5,1 4 5–158 (2023).
24. Thomas, P. S. et al. Preventing undesirable behavior of intelligent
machines. Science 366, 999–1004 (2019).
25. Kato, S. et al. Autoware on board: enabling autonomous vehicles
with embedded systems. In 2018 ACM/IEEE 9th International
Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS),2 8 7–296
(IEEE, 2018).
2 6 . H s u ,K .C . ,H u ,H .&F i s a c ,J .F .T h es a f e t yﬁlter: a uniﬁed view of
safety-critical control in autonomous systems.Ann. Rev. Control
Robot. Autonomous Syst.7,4 7–72 (2023).
27. Tokdar, S. T. & Kass, R. E. Importance sampling: a review. Wiley
Interdiscip. Rev.2,5 4–60 (2010).
28. Yan, X. et al. Learning naturalistic driving environment with statis-
tical realism. Nat. Commun. 14, 2037 (2023).
29. Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., & Klimov, O.
Proximal policy optimization algorithms. Preprint athttps://arxiv.
org/abs/1707.06347(2017).
30. Kochdumper, N. et al. Provably safe reinforcement learning via
action projection using reachability analysis and polynomial zono-
topes. IEEE Open J. Control Syst. 2,7 9–92 (2023).
3 1 . S h a l e v - S h w a r t z ,S . ,S h a m m a h ,S .&S h a s h u a ,A .O naf o r m a lm o d e l
of safe and scalable self-driving cars. Preprint at
https://arxiv.org/
abs/1708.06374(2017).
32. Wang, X. & Althoff, M. Safe reinforcement learning for automated
vehicles via online reachability analysis. InIEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Vehicles(IEEE, 2023).
33. Krajewski, R., Moers, T., Bock, J., Vater, L. & Eckstein, L. The round
dataset: a drone dataset of road user trajectories at roundabouts in
Germany. In 2020 IEEE 23rd International Conference on Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITSC),1 −6( I E E E ,2 0 2 0 ) .
34. Elbanhawi, M. & Simic, M. Sampling-based robot motion planning: a
review. IEEE Access 2,5 6–77 (2014).
35. Lopez, P. et al. Microscopic traf ﬁc simulation using sumo. In Inter-
national Conference on IntelligentTransportation Systems (ITSC),
2575–2582 (IEEE, 2018).
36. Treiber, M., Hennecke, A. & Helbing, D. Congested trafﬁc states in
empirical observations and microscopic simulations.Phys. Rev. E
62,1 8 0 5( 2 0 0 0 ) .
37. Caesar, H. et al. Nuplan: a closed-loop ml-based planning bench-
mark for autonomous vehicles. InCVPR ADP3 Workshop
(CVPR, 2021).
38. Dauner, D., Hallgarten, M., Geiger, A. & Chitta, K. Parting with mis-
conceptions about learning-based vehicle motion planning. In
Conference on Robot Learning(CoRL, 2023).
39. OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/
2303.08774(2023).
4 0 . K a n d p a l ,N . ,D e n g ,H . ,R o b e r t s ,A . ,W a l l a c e ,E .&R a f f e l ,C .L a r g e
language models struggle to learn long-tail knowledge. In
International Conference on Machine Learning,1 5 6 9 6–15707
(PMLR, 2023).
41. Sauerbier, J., Bock, J., Weber, H. & Eckstein, L. De ﬁnition of sce-
narios for safety validation of automated driving functions.ATZ
Worldw. 121, 4245 (2019).
42. Wang, J., Zhang, L., Huang, Y., Zhao, J. & Bella, F. Safety of auton-
omous vehicles. J. Adv. Transp. 2020,1 –13 (2020).
43. Zhu, Z. et al. Is sora a world simulator? a comprehensive survey on
general world models and beyond. Preprint athttps://arxiv.org/
abs/2405.03520(2024).
44. Owen, A. B. Monte Carlo Theory, Methods and Examples. https://
artowen.su.domains/mc/(2013).
45. Alain, G., Lamb, A., Sankar, C., Courville, A. & Bengio, Y. Variance
reduction in sgd by distributed importance sampling. Preprint at
https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06481(2015).
46. Sutton, R. S. & Barto, A. G. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction
(MIT Press, 2018).
47. Ciosek, K. & Whiteson, S. Offer: off-environment reinforcement
learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence,V o l .31,( A A A I ,2 0 1 7 ) .
48. Johnson, J. M. & Khoshgoftaar, T. M. Survey on deep learning with
class imbalance.
J. Big Data 6,1 –54 (2019).
49. Scanlon, J. M. et al. Waymo simulated driving behavior in recon-
structed fatal crashes within an autonomous vehicle operating
domain. Accid. Anal. Prev. 163, 106454 (2021).
50. Liang, E. et al. RLlib: Abstractions for distributed reinforcement
learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning
(PMLR, 2018).
51. Darweesh, H. et al. Open source integrated planner for autonomous
navigation in highly dynamic environments.J. Robot. Mechatron.
29,6 6 8–684 (2017).
52. Feng, S. et al. Safety assessment of highly automated driving sys-
tems in test tracks: a new framework. Accid. Anal. Prev. 144,
105664 (2020).
53. Chang A. X. et al. ShapeNet: an information-rich 3d model reposi-
tory. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03012(2015).
54. Bezzina, D., Sayer, J. Safety Pilot Model Deployment: Test Conductor
Team Report. Report No. DOT HS 812 171. Washington, DC: National
Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration (2014).
55. Sayer, J. et al. Integrated Vehicle-based Safety Systems Field
Operational Test: Final Program Report.N o .F H W A - J P O−11−150;
UMTRI-2010-36. United States. Joint Program Ofﬁce for Intelligent
Transportation Systems (2011).
56. Feng, S., Yan, X., Sun, H., Feng, Y. & Liu, H. X. Intelligent driving
intelligence test for autonomous vehicles with naturalistic and
adversarial environment.Nat. Commun. 12,1 –14 (2021).
57. National Center for Statistics and Analysis. Fatality Analysis
Reporting System (FARS) Analytical User’s Manual, 1975-2018.
Report No. DOT HS 812 827. Washington, DC: National Highway
Trafﬁc Safety Administration.https://www.nhtsa.gov/research-
data/fatality-analysis-reporting-system-fars(2019).
Acknowledgements
This research was partially funded by the U.S. Department of Transpor-
tation (USDOT) Region 5 University Transportation Center: Center for
Connected and Automated Transportation (CCAT) of the University of
Michigan (69A3551747105) and the National Science Foundation (CMMI
#2223517). Any opinions,ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reﬂect the ofﬁcial policy or position of the U.S. government.
Author contributions
S.F. and H.L. conceived and led the research program, developed the
dense learning approach, and wrote the paper. S.F., H.Z., and H.S.
developed the algorithms, designed the experiments, and performed
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-69761-x
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:3163 12
the results. H.Z., H.S., L.H., and S.L. implemented the algorithms in
simulation, performed the simulation tests, and prepared the simulation
results. H.Z., X.Y., B.L., and S.S. implemented the algorithms in the
autonomous vehicle, performed theﬁeld tests, and prepared the testing
results. S.F., J.Y., G.S., and L.W. developed the theoretical analysis. All
authors provided feedback during the manuscript revision and results
discussions. H.L. approved the submission and accepted responsibility
for the overall integrity of the paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary informationThe online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-69761-x.
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Henry X. Liu.
Peer review informationNature Communicationsthanks Matthias
Althoff, and Mozhgan Nasr Azadani for their contribution to the peer
review of this work. A peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed
material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted
material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third
party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
Commons licence, unless indicatedotherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2026
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-69761-x
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:3163 13