ARTICLE
Network isolators inhibit failure spreading in
complex networks
Franz Kaiser 1,2, Vito Latora 3,4,5,6 & Dirk Witthaut 1,2 ✉
In our daily lives, we rely on the proper functioning of supply networks, from power grids to
water transmission systems. A single failure in these critical infrastructures can lead to a
complete collapse through a cascading failure mechanism. Counteracting strategies are thus
heavily sought after. In this article, we introduce a general framework to analyse the
spreading of failures in complex networks and demostrate that not only decreasing but also
increasing the connectivity of the network can be an effective method to contain damages.
We rigorously prove the existence of certain subgraphs, called network isolators, that can
completely inhibit any failure spreading, and we show how to create such isolators in syn-
thetic and real-world networks. The addition of selected links can thus prevent large scale
outages as demonstrated for power transmission grids.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9 OPEN
1 Forschungszentrum Jülich, Institute for Energy and Climate Research (IEK-STE), Jülich, Germany. 2 Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Cologne,
Köln, Germany. 3 School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK. 4 Dipartimento di Fisica ed Astronomia, Università di
Catania and INFN, Catania, Italy. 5 The Alan Turing Institute, The British Library, London, UK. 6 Complexity Science Hub Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
✉email: d.witthaut@fz-juelich.de
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:3143 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 1
1234567890():,;
C
omplex networked systems are subject to external per-
turbations, damages or attacks with potentially cata-
strophic consequences 1,2. The loss of even a single edge
can cause a blackout in a power grid 3,4, the dieback of a biological
network5, or the collapse of an entire ecological network 6.I ti s
thus essential to understand how the structure of a network
determines its response to perturbations and its global
resilience7–11. Here, we propose a general framework to model
the redistribution of ﬂows in a complex network that follows a
small and local failure, and we suggest novel and more ef ﬁcient
strategies to improve network resilience. Our ﬁndings reveal that
propagation of damages can be better limited by adding selected
links instead of removing links and can turn very useful to
construct more robust networks or to improve existing ones.
The division of a network into weakly coupled parts provides
the most intuitive method to inhibit the spreading of failures, thus
improving system resilience 12–15. An example is shown in Fig. 1a
for an elementary supply network with two weakly connected
modules. The response to an edge failure is strong locally, but it is
reduced in the other module of the network which has only few
links connecting to the part where the failure happened. A similar
effect is observed in a real-world case: the Scandinavian power
grid in Fig. 1d. The study of community structures in both natural
and man-made systems is an integral part of network science: a
variety of methods has been developed to de ﬁne and identify the
weakly connected modules of a network 16–18, and the important
role of community structures in network dynamics is today well
recognised.
Limiting connectivity for the sake of additional security is,
however, not always desirable. For instance, microgrid concepts
and intentional islanding are heavily discussed in energy systems
research19,20, but the overall demand for electric power trans-
mission actually increases 21,22. Other methods to contain per-
turbations or damages in complex networks are thus needed.
Indeed, an exceptionally strong interconnectivity between two
modules can also suppress failure spreading as shown in Fig. 1b,
e. Notably, a strong interconnectivity can be realised in different
ways. In the random network example in Fig. 1b, a high number
of links connects a subset of nodes of the two modules. In real
vascular networks of leaves the suppression of failure spreading
occurs naturally because the central vein between the left and
right parts has an exceptionally large weight (Fig. 1e, cf. also
23).
Remarkably, failure spreading can be completely stopped by
certain subgraphs which we refer to as network isolators in the
following, an example being shown in Fig. 1c. The failure of an
edge in the right part of the network does not affect the ﬂows in
the left part at all. Real world networks can be made perfectly
resistant to failure propagation by the ad-hoc addition of few
links to create network isolators, as demonstrated for the Scan-
dinavian power grid in Fig. 1f consisting of three weakly coupled
modules. The suppression of failure spreading is readily gen-
eralised to networks with more than two modules.
Results
A model for supply networks . Our results are based on a general
framework that allows a theoretical analysis of the interplay of
network connectivity and robustness in the context of supply or
transportation networks. Consider a simple graph G with edge set
E and vertex set V consisting of L = ∣E∣ edges and N = ∣V∣ ver-
tices. Many such systems can in fact be modelled by linear ﬂow
networks where the ﬂow over an edge e = (i, j) 2 E(G) depends
linearly on the gradient of a potential function across the edge,
Fi!j ¼ Aij /C1ðϑi /C0ϑjÞ: ð1Þ
In particular, this description applies to power transmission
grids2,24–26, where F is the real power ﬂow, ϑi denotes the nodal
voltage phase angle and Aij is given by the line susceptance. Non-
linear effects in electric power grids will be discussed below.
Furthermore, the description ( 1) applies to hydraulic and vascular
networks27,28, where F is the ﬂow of water or nutrients, ϑi is the
local pressure and Aij the edge’s weight. Equivalent problems arise
in the linearisation of general diffusively coupled networks of
dynamical systems around an equilibrium or limit cycle 29.W e
discuss these and other applications of linear ﬂow models in
detail in Supplementary Note 1.
Now assume that there are sources and sinks attached to the
nodes in the network Pi 2 R; i 2 VðGÞ where Pi > 0 represents a
Fig. 1 Different network structures inhibit the spreading of failures in complex networks. We simulate the impact of a single failing link (red) for different
network structures; resulting ﬂow changes are colour coded. a, b Both a weak and a strong interconnectivity can suppress the spreading of failures between
two modules of a complex network. c Failure spreading is prevented completely by a network isolator (blue shading); ﬂow changes on the grey links are
exactly zero. d The Scandinavian power grid consists of three weakly connected modules, which suppresses failure spreading between the modules 44.
e The vascular network of a Bursera hollickii leaf contains a strong central vein 47, which suppresses failure spreading between the two sides of the leaf.
f Same as in ( d) but with the addition of two links (blue shading) to create a network isolator. See Methods and caption of Fig. 2 for further information on
the graphs used here.
ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9
2 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:3143 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
source and Pi < 0 a sink. Then the ﬂows at each node have to
balance with the sources and sinks
Pi ¼ ∑
N
j¼1
Fi!j 8i 2 VðGÞ: ð2Þ
This equation is known as continuity equation or Kirchhoff’s
current law. If the sources and sinks Pi are given, Eqs. ( 2) and ( 1)
completely determine the potentials in the network (up to a
constant shift to all potentials). In a power grid, the sources and
sinks are the power injections or withdrawals as a result of power
production or consumption, respectively. When looking at the
stable, operational ﬁxed point of a power grid they are balanced
such that
∑
N
i¼1
Pi ¼ 0; ð3Þ
we therefore assume this to hold in the following sections.
For further use, we introduce a compact vectorised notation,
deﬁning the vector of injections P! ¼ð P1; ¼ ; PN Þ> and the
vector of potentials ϑ! ¼ð ϑ1; ¼ ; ϑN Þ>, where the superscript ⊤
denotes the transpose. The coupling coef ﬁcients Aij = Aji are
summarised in the weighted adjacency matrix A 2 RN ´ N .
Furthermore, we de ﬁne the diagonal matrix D 2 RN ´ N with
entries Dii = ∑jAij as well as the weighted graph Laplacian 30
L ¼ D /C0A: ð4Þ
Kirchhoff’s equations then assume the compact form
L ϑ! ¼ P!: ð5Þ
Notably, the Laplacian matrix is also useful to infer the large scale
connectivity and the community structure of a given network 31.
Modelling link failures . The impact of a damage in linear
ﬂow networks can be calculated analytically. Assume that an
edge ℓ = (r, s) fails, and summarise the response at all nodes i =
1, …, N in terms of the vector of changes in nodal potentials
Δ ϑ! ¼ð Δϑ1; ¼ ; ΔϑN Þ>. The response can be calculated by
subtracting Eq. ( 5) for the new and the old network which yields
after some manipulations (Ref. 25, Supplementary Note 2)
L Δ ϑ! ¼ q‘ ν!
‘; ð6Þ
where ν!
‘ is a vector with +1 at position r and −1 at position s,
and q‘ ¼ 1 /C0Ars ν!>
‘ L/C01 ν!
‘ is a source strength 25. We thus ﬁnd
that the response of a network to failures is essentially determined
by the Laplacian L.
To quantify the effect of connectivity on failure spreading, we
have studied the impact of different failures in a variety of
synthetic networks as well as in several real-world networks. For a
given initial failure of an edge ℓ, we compute the ﬂow changes
ΔFi!j ¼ Aij /C1ðΔϑi /C0ΔϑjÞ ð7Þ
for all edges e = (i, j) in a given subgraph G0 of the network.
Furthermore, we must take into account that the impact of a
failure generally decreases with distance 25,32,33. As an overall
measure of the impact of a failure we thus consider the expression
hjΔFi!jjiði;jÞ2G0
d , which gives the magnitude of ﬂow changes
averaged over all edges ði; jÞ2 G0 at a given distance d to the edge
ℓ (see Methods for details on the notion of distance used here).
The prime question is now whether the impact differs
substantially between the communities or moduli of a network.
Here, we assume that the moduli or communities are known for
the network under consideration and thus do not address the
question how to determine them. We thus plot the ratio
Rð‘; dÞ¼
hjΔFi!jjiði;jÞ2 O
d
hjΔFi!jjiði;jÞ2 S
d
: ð8Þ
between the module of the network G0 ¼ O without initial
failures and the module G0 ¼ S containing the failing edge ℓ.I f
this ratio approaches or reaches zero, this is indicative of a very
strong suppression of failure spreading into the other part of the
network.
The impact of network connectivity on failure spreading .T o
study how the impact of failure spreading depends on the net-
work structure, we considered synthetic graphs obtained by
connecting two Erd ős–Rényi (ER) random graphs to each other
at preselected, randomly chosen vertices with a tunable prob-
ability μ 2 [0, 1]34 (see Methods). The resulting graphs have a
connectivity structure ranging from two weakly connected com-
munities for low values of μ shown in Fig. 1a to strongly con-
nected parts shown in panel b. In the limit μ = 1, the two modules
are connected via a complete bipartite graph as shown in Fig. 1c.
This is a possible realisation of a network isolator , since it com-
pletely suppresses ﬂow changes. We will explain the concept of
network isolators and provide a rigorous de ﬁnition in the next
section.
The corresponding adjacency matrices clearly indicate the
connectivity structure, revealing the strong or weak coupling
between the two modules of the networks (Fig. 2a, b, d).
Remarkably, evaluating the quantity R(ℓ), obtained by averaging
the ratio over ﬂow changes R(ℓ, d) over all distances d for a
speciﬁc trigger link ℓ, for a varying connectivity structure tuned
by μ,w e ﬁnd that the spreading of failures is largely suppressed
for both weak and strong connectivity between the two modules
as shown in Fig. 2c. Note that this ﬁnding is not limited to the
interconnectivity of two modules, but can be readily generalised
to three —or more —modules as we demonstrate in Supplemen-
tary Fig. 3. Distance plays a minor role for the ratio of ﬂow
changes R(ℓ, d) as illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 2.
Network isolators inhibit failure spreading . Network symme-
tries are known to play an important role for the dynamics and
synchronisability of a network 35–37. Network isolators as a spe-
ciﬁc connectivity structure completely inhibit the spreading of
failures from one network module to another. They manifest also
as particular, symmetric patterns in the region of the adjacency
matrix describing the connectivity between the two parts of the
network as we have seen in Fig. 2d. To see this, we make use of
Eq. (4) to rewrite the Laplacian matrix L of the entire network as
follows
L ¼ L1 þ D1 /C0A12
/C0A>
12 L2 þ D2
/C18/C19
ð9Þ
Here, L1 and L2 are the Laplacian matrices of the two parts of the
network which consist of N1 and N2 nodes, A12 2 RN1 ´ N2 is the
region of the weighted adjacency matrix encoding the con-
nectivity between the two parts of the network and D1 and D2 are
the degree matrices of these mutual connections, i.e. the matrices
containing the nodes ’ weighted degrees on the diagonals. Then
network isolators are characterised by the following theorem.
Theorem 1 Consider a linear ﬂow network composed of two
modules 1,2 and let A12 denote the weighted adjacency matrix of
the mutual connections as described in Eq. ( 9). An edge failure in
one module does not affect the ﬂows in the other module if rank
(A12) = 1. For unweighted networks this criterion is ful ﬁlled if
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:3143 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 3
A12 describes a complete bipartite graph. The subgraph connect-
ing the two modules is referred to as a network isolator .
A proof can be found in Supplementary Note 3. Note that,
while network isolators prevent failure spreading, we found that
they do not in ﬂuence network controllability as we illustrate in
Supplementary Note 4 and Supplementary Fig. 8.
Since most real world examples of networks do not contain
perfect network isolators, we have studied the robustness of a
network isolator against modi ﬁcations of the topology. Starting
from a unit rank matrix, we perturb the adjacency matrix A12
iteratively (see Methods for details). The deviation of the
perturbed matrix A12 from a unit rank matrix is then quanti ﬁed
using its coherence statistics de ﬁned as 38,
ξðA12Þ¼ 1 /C0min
i;j
h a!
i; a!
ji
k a!
i kk a!
j k
; ð10Þ
where a!
i; i ¼ 1; ¼ ; m are the matrix columns. Note that the
latter expression cos ðﬀ a!
i; a!
jÞ¼
h a!
i ; a!
ji
k a!
i kk a!
j k
may also be inter-
preted via the angle between two matrix columns, a!
i and thus ξ
(A12) approaches a value of unity if all columns are parallel. The
performance of the isolator is then measured by calculating the
ratio of ﬂow changes R, which is obtained from R(ℓ, d)b y
averaging over all possible trigger links and distances. A perfect
isolator is characterised by ξ(A12) = 0 and enables a complete
containment of failure spreading such that R = 0. For perturbed
isolators, we ﬁnd that R increases approximately algebraically
with ξ(A12), see Fig. 2e and Supplementary Fig. 5. Hence, the
isolation effect persists for small perturbations, albeit with
reduced ef ﬁciency. Note also that network isolators are not
limited to two connected modules, but can be readily generalised
to the interconnectivity of three —or more —modules that are
mutually shielded against failures as we demonstrate in
Supplementary Fig. 4. Finally, we illustrate that network isolators
do not increase the vulnerability of a network in case a link
located in the isolator fails in Supplementary Fig. 6.
Constructing network isolators in real-world graphs . Network
isolators are not limited to the particular situation shown in
Fig. 1. In Fig. 3a–c, we identify several subgraphs that allow to
easily introduce network isolators into existing topologies. For
subgraphs with a prior low connectivity, as measured by a small
vertex cut (Fig. 3a) or a small edge cut (Fig. 3b, c), network
isolators may be introduced with small network modi ﬁcations—
by adding (a,b) or removing and adding (c) selected links with
weights adjusted such that Theorem 1 is ful ﬁlled. For a given
graph these recipes may thus be applied as follows: (1) Identify
modules of the graph that are weakly connected to one another as
measured by a low vertex cut or edge cut of the vertices or edges
connecting them. (2) Depending on the target —e.g. whether
building new edges or vertices is costly or, on the other hand, a
minimum connectivity between the modules is required after the
modiﬁcation—identify the optimal strategy to achieve a complete
bipartite connectivity between the modules by adding or
removing vertices and edges. Here, the recipes shown in the
Figure may be applied directly if the prior connectivity has the
indicated edge or vertex cuts. (3) Tune the edge weights such that
rank(A12) = 1 is achieved, i.e. a network isolator is realised.
We illustrate each of the strategies in real-world power grids.
We consider the British grid (d), the Scandinavian power grid (e)
and the Central European power grid (f) and add a network
isolator to each of the networks by making use of the strategies
shown in panels a –c. We then simulate the failure of a single link
to illustrate that network isolators suppress failure spreading in
each situation. Thus, network isolators can be used to make
various real-world power grids more resilient to failures. In a
Supplementary Fig. 7, we compare the situation with the isolator
to the situation before constructing the isolator for each of the
networks.
Network isolators suppress cascade propagation . Perfect net-
work isolators can be easily constructed to improve the resilience
of complex networked systems. As a practical example we show
an application to electric power grids, where large scale blackouts
isolator
Fig. 2 Effectiveness and robustness of shielding network structures. a , b Adjacency matrices for the graphs shown in Fig. 1a, b. Two random graphs
G(30,0.4) are inter-connected via a fraction c = 0.2 of their nodes chosen at random, and links are added with probability μ, interpolating between weak
(a) or strong ( b) interconnectivity (see Methods for details). c The average ratio of ﬂow changes R(ℓ) in the two components (Eq. ( 8)) is strongly
suppressed for both high and low interconnectivity μ. The blue line represents the median value over all distances and the shaded region indicates the
0.25- and 0.75-quantiles. d Adjacency matrix for the six-regular graph shown in Fig. 1c and containing a network isolator. Note that all nodes in the graph
including those in the network isolator have degree equal to six, which allows us to exclude any potential impact of heterogeneity in the degree on fail ure
spreading in this case. e The ratio of ﬂow changes R, now averaged over all possible trigger links ℓ and distances d, vanishes for a network isolator
described by the condition ξ(A12) = 0 and increases algebraically with the coherence parameter ξ (cf. Eq. ( 10)) when perturbed (see Methods for details
on the simulation). Again, median and 0.25- and 0.75-quantiles are shown resulting from averaging over all distances and then trigger links.
ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9
4 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:3143 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
are typically triggered by the outage of a single transmission
element which leads to a cascade of failures 3,39. We demonstrate
the impact of network isolators against cascading failures in the
case of the Scandinavian grid.
In the original grid layout, the modules are weakly connected,
thus failure spreading between these modules is reduced —but it is
possible. A failure in one area can spread to other areas and cause
a global cascade of failures, as demonstrated in Fig. 4a, b for a
cascade emerging in Western Norway. This spreading may in
principle be prevented by decoupling different areas of the grid,
but this is highly undesired. In fact, future energy systems will
require more connectivity, not less, to transmit an increasing
amount of renewable electric power 21,22. In contrast, building a
network isolator can completely inhibit failure spreading at
increased connectivity. A perfect isolator can be realised with
moderate effort by reconstructing two substations in Norway,
such that they effectively form two nodes each. The new nodes
must be linked by internal connections and one additional two-
circuit overhead line, whose parameters are optimised such that
the condition rank( A12) = 1 is satis ﬁed (Fig. 4c). A simulation for
such an optimised grid layout shows that the spreading of the
cascade is completely suppressed (Fig. 4d). The network remains
connected and load shedding is no longer necessary as a
containment strategy
2,3. To demonstrate that network isolators
effectively suppress cascade propagation for different networks
and initial failure patterns, we evaluate the statistics of cascade
sizes in networks with and without network isolators (see
Supplementary Fig. 9). To analyse how the relatively localised
ﬂow changes involved here lead to a non-local cascade, individual
steps of the cascade are shown in Supplementary Fig. 12.
Network isolators beyond linear ﬂow networks . The concept of
network isolators has been established for linear ﬂow networks,
but can be extended in two ways. (1) We can rigorously prove that
network isolators determine the response to structural damages
for a class of non-linear networked dynamical systems with dif-
fusive coupling. More precisely, the isolator effect is still rigorously
valid if the dynamics of a node i depends on the state of the other
nodes xj only through the term fi(∑jLijxj), where L is the Laplacian
and the function fi satisﬁes fi(0) = 0, but is arbitrary otherwise (see
Supplementary Note 3, Corollary 2). (2) For many non-linear
systems of practical importance, the impact of failures or pertur-
bations is well described by a linearisation around an equilibrium
or limit cycle (see ref. 29) for which an approximate isolation can
be achieved (see Supplementary Note 3, subsection 4).
To systematically analyse how non-linearity affects failure
spreading through network isolators we ﬁrst consider a natural
extension of the linear ﬂows in Eq. ( 1), replacing the linear
coupling by its sinusoidal counterpart
~Fi!j ¼ Aij /C1sinðϑi /C0ϑjÞ; ð11Þ
which yields the well-known Kuramoto model 40,41. If phase
differences between neighbouring vertices are small, one can
expand the sine function as sin ðϑi /C0ϑjÞ¼ð ϑi /C0ϑjÞþ
Oððϑi /C0ϑjÞ3Þ (see Supplementary Note 1). Hence, our previous
result remain valid to linear order, whereas a higher degree of
non-linearity may gradually weaken the effects. In particular, the
effectiveness of a network isolator depends on the relative load of
the edges j~Fi!jj=Aij. We study this numerically by increasing the
injections Pi at all nodes proportionally, thus increasing the
relative edge loads and the importance of the non-linearity of the
sine function.
We then analyse the non-linear ﬂow changes Δ~Fð‘Þ after the
failure of a single link for different degrees of non-linearity in
Fig. 5a, b (light to dark lines). To systematically evaluate the
degree of non-linearity, we analyse the maximal absolute non-
linear ﬂow j~Fjmax in the entire network. Due to the sinusoidal
character of the coupling (see Eq. ( 11)) and since edge weights are
set to unity for the Figure, a relative loading close to unity
indicates a highly non-linear system. As expected, the ﬂow
changes decrease with distance independently of the non-linearity.
However, even for the strongest degree of non-linearity considered
here, ﬂow changes in the module shielded by the isolator are still
Fig. 3 Different ways of constructing isolators in real-world power grids. a –c Alternative methods of creating an isolator in a given network. We show the
network structure before (top left) and after (top right) the addition of a network isolator, as well as corresponding adjacency matrices (bottom) wi th
the different shades of blue representing the weight Aij of the respective edge. A lower prior connectivity simpli ﬁes the creation of isolators as measured by
the vertex cut ( a) or edge cut ( b, c) which is visible in the adjacency matrix (entries colored red). The creation of network isolators results in characteristic
patterns in the adjacency matrix in terms of the capacities of the isolator edges (shades of blue). d–f Realisation of network isolators in real-world power
grids. We construct network isolators in the British power grid ( d), the Scandinavian power grid ( e) and the Central European power grid ( f) using the
recipes illustrated in ( a–c). For each power grid, we colour code the ﬂow changes after the failure of a single link carrying a unit ﬂow (red). In each case, the
network isolator inhibits ﬂow changes, i.e. ΔF = 0, (light grey) in the part of the network that is shielded by the isolator.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:3143 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 5
several orders of magnitude lower than at the same distance in the
module containing the trigger link. We con ﬁrm this result by
evaluating the non-linear version of the ﬂow ratio ( 8) for different
graphs, network conditions and degrees of non-linearity in
Supplementary Fig. 10. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
introducing a network isolator may slightly improve the system ’s
resilience against dynamically induced failures due to transient
overloads in Supplementary Fig. 11.
We now study the robustness of this effect in several regards
and elucidate possible ways to designing robust network isolators
for non-linear systems. The condition rank( A12) = 1 allows for
different possible realisations of network isolators in terms of the
edge weights. In linear ﬂow networks, all these realisations are
equally ef ﬁcient: They completely suppress ﬂow changes in the
module shielded by the network isolator by virtue of Theorem 1.
But which combination of edge weights provides the strongest
isolating effect in weakly non-linear systems?
To examine this question systematically we consider a simple
but non-trivial realisation of a network isolator where two nodes
in one module are connected to two nodes in the other module
(see e.g. Fig. 3a, right). The isolator is thus formed by four edges,
and we ﬁx the overall possible available edge weight to build the
network isolator to a constant value A 2 R. Hence, the weights
of the four edges in the isolator have to satisfy two conditions,
a1 þ a2 þ a3 þ a4 ¼ A and a1a4 /C0a2a3 ¼ 0;
leaving two degrees of freedom to optimise the isolator
performance (see Methods for details). In Fig. 5c we examine
the network isolator ’s performance measured by the averaged,
non-linear ﬂow changes in the module shielded by the isolator for
all possible failing links in the other module for a weakly non-
linear system with ﬂows described by Eq. ( 11). On the other hand,
we analyse the worst-case available N − 1 weight, i.e. the overall
edge weight connecting the two modules if the edge in the
network isolator with the largest weight fails. We ﬁnd that
network isolators with strongly heterogeneous edge weights a1
and a2 inhibit failure spreading the most in the weakly non-linear
system under consideration. However, the uniform choice ai ¼
A=4; i 2f 1; 2; 3; 4g yields the highest the available N − 1 weight,
while still inhibiting failure spreading relatively strongly. Note
that other choices to estimate the impact of removing a single link
in the network isolator, e.g. the size of the cascade caused by the
failure of the link in the isolator or the reduction in shielding
provided by the isolator after the failure might come to a different
conclusion which choice of weights yields the “bestˮ network
isolator.
We now further extend the results on non-linear systems by
considering the full load ﬂow equations that describe power ﬂows
in power grids with line losses. The results of the numerical
simulations are reported in Fig. 6: First, we consider the impact of
a single failing line for a realistic dispatch and realistic line
weights in the British power grid without any modi ﬁcation, where
ﬂows are now evaluated based on the full non-linear AC load
ﬂow42. For a given vertex i 2 V(G) they are calculated as
(Supplementary Note 1, Eq.( 8))
Pi ¼ ∑
N
k¼1
jVijjVkjðGik cosðϑi /C0ϑkÞþ Bik sinðϑi /C0ϑkÞÞ;
Qi ¼ ∑
N
k¼1
jVijjVkjðGik sinðϑi /C0ϑkÞ/C0 Bik cosðϑi /C0ϑkÞÞ:
ð12Þ
Note that this set of equations again reduces to the linear ﬂow
Fig. 4 Network isolators can contain cascading failures in power grids. a Line loading (colour code) on the Scandinavian grid in units relative to maximal
loading before the initial failure of a single line (coloured red). b The initial failure results in a cascade of overloads (red coloured lines) until the grid
disconnects into several parts. c Magniﬁcation of the grid structure in Eastern Norway (grey box, a). A small modi ﬁcation of the grid enables the
construction of a network isolator: adopting the recipe presented in Fig. 3a, we select two nodes (left) that are further split up into two separate nodes each
which are mutually connected via a network isolator by adding four edges (right, green). Note that the removal of these two nodes would disconnect the
network into two separate parts, i.e. they form a vertex cut of size two. d Introducing the network isolator completely suppresses the spreading of failures
from Western Norway to the rest of the grid thus inhibiting the cascade observed in ( b). The ﬁrst two steps of this cascade are shown in Supplementary
Fig. 12.
ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9
6 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:3143 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
model in Eqs. ( 2) and ( 1) in the so-called DC approximation (see
Supplementary Note 1). As a result, failures spread to both the
Northern part of the power grid and the Southern part equally
(panel a). After introducing a network isolator by adding two
links, ﬂow changes are completely suppressed in the linear
approximation of power ﬂows (panel b), but also signi ﬁcantly
reduced when calculating the ﬂow changes based on the full non-
linear AC power ﬂow: Comparing the non-linearly calculated
ﬂow changes in the initial scenario and the scenario with the
isolator, we observe an ~100-fold reduction at all distances to the
failing link in the module shielded by the network isolator (panel
d). Thus we conclude that isolators also suppress failure
spreading in non-linear models.
Discussion
In conclusion, connectivity determines the resilience of complex
networks in manifold ways. As expected, a division of a network
into weakly coupled modules suppresses the spreading of failures
from one module to the others. Remarkably, we have found that a
strong interconnectivity can equally well suppress the spreading
in both ﬂow networks and in networks of non-linear dynamical
systems. We have demonstrated that an even stronger effect can
be obtained by certain subgraphs called isolators, which com-
pletely inhibit the spreading of failures in linear systems.
We then showed that isolators can be easily created in a net-
work to mitigate cascading failures, for instance in electric power
grids, while enabling an arbitrary degree of connectivity between
the different parts of the network. These results widen our per-
spective on the large scale organisation of complex networks in
general, showing that very diverse structural patterns can exist
that isolate functional units and improve network resilience.
Furthermore, our results show that algebraic properties of
networks can have striking effects on their function and robust-
ness—depending on the type of ﬂow model. Similar effects are
not present in simple models where ﬂows are rerouted along the
shortest paths only
4,9, but they can become essential in physical
supply network models where various paths contribute and
interact in a non-trivial way.
Methods
Creating graphs with strong or weak inter-module connectivity . We introduce
a model to create ensembles of graphs consisting of two subgraphs with weak or
strong interconnectvity similar to the approach in ref.
43, see Figs. 1 and 2. We start
with two disconnected Erd ős–Rényi random graphs G1(N1, p1) and G2(N2, p2),
where N denotes the number of nodes in the graph and p the probability that two
randomly chosen nodes are connected by an edge 34. Then we randomly choose
n1 = [c ⋅N1] nodes v ¼f v1; :::; vn1
g in G1 and n2 = [c ⋅N2] nodes w ¼f w1; :::; wn2
g
in G2. Here, c 2½ 0; 1/C138/C26R is a constant representing the share of nodes connecting
Fig. 5 Robust design of network isolators in the Kuramoto model. a To
study the effect of non-linearity on network isolators, we simulate the failure of
a single link (red) in a network consisting of two modules that are connected
via a network isolator. b We consider the median absolute non-linearﬂow
changesjΔ~Fð‘Þj (Eq. (11)) on a link ℓ after the removal of the link shown in (a).
We analyse the effect of edge distance to the failing link (x-axis) and increasing
degree of non-linearity (colour code from light to dark). We compare theﬂow
changes in the lower module that contains the failing link (curves on the upper
left) and the isolated module (curves on the lower right) by averaging theﬂow
changes over all links in the given module at aﬁxed distance. As expected,ﬂow
changes in the upper module are lowest for a weakly non-linear system (bright
line) and increase with the non-linearity, but a strong isolation effect persists
even for a high degree of non-linearity (dark purple line). Shaded region
indicates the 0.25- and 0.75-quantiles evaluated over the given distance.c We
ﬁx the overall available edge weight of the four edges forming the isolator to
∑iai = 4 and systematically scan over the remaining degrees of freedom,
measuring the isolator performance in terms of the mean logarithmicﬂow
changes hlog10ðjΔ ~FjÞi for a ﬁxed degree of (intermediate) non-linearity. We
observe that a heterogeneous isolator where the weights differ strongly
provides the best shielding.d W ee v a l u a t et h ea v a i l a b l ew o r s t - c a s eN − 1
weight, i.e. the overall edge weight connecting the two modules after the failure
of a single link in the isolator, for the same set of edge weights as in (c). Here,
isolators with homogeneous weights perform best. Edge weights of all non-
isolator edges are set to unity, Aij = 1, 8ði; jÞ2 E(G) in all panels.
Fig. 6 Network isolators suppress failure spreading in full non-linear AC load ﬂow. a An initially failing link with unit ﬂow (red) in the British power grid
results in changes of real power ﬂow (colour code) throughout the whole network, as obtained by computing a non-linear full AC power ﬂow44. b, c After
introducing a network isolator based on the strategy presented in panel ( a of Fig. 3), failure spreading is perfectly inhibited in the linear power ﬂow
approximation, and still signi ﬁcantly reduced in the non-linear full AC load ﬂow. d We compare the median absolute ﬂow changes, calculated using the
non-linear load ﬂow (Eq. ( 12)), after the failure of the link in the initial grid (dashed lines, a) and the modi ﬁed grid (dotted lines, c). Whereas the ﬂow
changes in the lower module of the power grid (dark blue nodes) stay approximately the same after the grid modi ﬁcation (dark blue lines), they are
signiﬁcantly reduced in the grid ’s upper module (light blue nodes) that is shielded by the network isolator (light blue lines).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:3143 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 7
to the other subgraph and [ ⋅] denotes the nearest integer. Out of all possible edges
e ¼f ðv1; w1Þ; :::; ðvn1
; w1 Þ; :::; ðvn1
; wn2
Þg between the two sets of nodes v and w,w e
randomly add a share of μ 2 [0, 1]. The parameter μ controls the connectivity of
the two subgraphs G1 and G2: They remain disconnected for μ = 0 and they are
connected via a complete bipartite graph for for μ = 1. For c = 1 and μ = p1 = p2
we recover a single Erd ős–Rényi random graph with N = N1 + N2 nodes. Note that
this procedure is in principal not limited to ER random graphs. We apply it to
study other types of graphs as shown in Supplementary Fig. 1.
Calculating the distance between edges . The notion of distance used throughout
the manuscript is the unweighted edge distance. This notion of distance measures
the length of the shortest path between two edges ℓ = (r, s) and e = (m, n) and is
deﬁned as follows
25
distð‘; eÞ¼ min
v1 2fr;sg;v2 2fm;ng
dðv1 ; v2 Þþ 1; ð13Þ
where d(v1, v2) is the unweighted shortest-path or geodesic distance between nodes
v1 and v2 and the addition of unity ensures that neighbouring edge have a non-
vanishing distance.
Perturbing network isolators . The robustness of network isolators to structural
perturbations is analysed as follows. Let G = (E, V) be a graph whose nodes are split
into two subsets V1 and V2 consisting of N1 and N2 nodes, respectively. Further-
more, let A12 be the N1 × N2 weighted adjacency matrix that encodes the mutual
connections between the two parts as described in Theorem 1. Without loss of
generality we can order the nodes of the network in such a way that the matrix has
the structure
A
12 ¼ a!
1 /C1/C1/C1 a!
m 0! /C1/C1/C1 0!
0! /C1/C1/C1 0! 0! /C1/C1/C1 0!
 !
; ð14Þ
where we assume that n nodes of the ﬁrst subset are connected to m nodes of the
other subset and thus a!
1; ¼ ; a!
m 2 Rn. According to Theorem 1, a perfect
network isolator is found if rank( A12) = 1, i.e. if all vectors a!
1; ¼ ; a!
m are lin-
early dependent.
To investigate the robustness of network isolators, we start from a unit rank
matrix rank ( A12) = 1 and perturb it iteratively. In each step we choose one of the
vectors a!
i; i ¼ 1; ¼ ; m at random and perturb it according to
a!0
i ¼ a!
i þ e! k a!
i k. The elements of the perturbation vector e! are chosen
uniformly at random from the interval [ −β, β], where β is a small parameter, here
β = 0.05.
The deviation of the perturbed matrix A12 from a unit rank matrix is quanti ﬁed
using its coherence statistics 38, Eq. ( 10),
ξðA12 Þ¼ 1 /C0min
i;j
h a!
i; a!
ji
k a!
i kk a!
j k
;
where 〈⋅, ⋅〉 denotes the standard scalar product on Rn and ∥⋅∥ denotes the ℓ2-
norm. For a matrix A12 of unit rank we have ξ(A12) = 0 as all vectors are linearly
dependent. For vectors deviating from linear dependence, the measure increases
until it reaches its maximum value if two vectors are orthogonal with ξ(A12) = 1.
To create Fig. 2e, we repeated this process 1000 times starting from the perfect
isolator shown in panel c. Edge weights were randomly chosen from a normal
distribution N ð10; 1Þ with mean μ = 10 and variance σ2 = 1 except for the isolator.
The network isolator consists of four nodes in the left subgraph that are completely
connected to four nodes in the other subgraph (see Fig. 1c). We select groups
of four edges that are connected to a single node in one subgraph and to all
four nodes in the other subgraph to have the same weight such that initially rank
(A
12) = 1. For each perturbed network, we evaluate ξ(A12) and the ratio of ﬂow
changes R according to Eq. ( 3) averaged over all possible trigger links ℓ and
distances d. For a perfect isolator, this ratio vanishes due to a vanishing numerator.
Power grid data and cascade model . Power grid data has been extracted from the
open European energy system model PyPSA-Eur, which is fully available online 44.
The model includes the topology as well as the susceptance bℓ and the line rating
Fmax
i!j for each high voltage transmission line in Europe. We consider the Scandi-
navian synchronous grid spanning Norway, Sweden, Finland and parts of Den-
mark. This grid is coupled to other synchronous grids (central European grid,
British grid and Baltic grid) only via high voltage DC transmission lines. Power
ﬂow on these lines are actively controlled and can thus be considered constant, thus
leading to constant real power injections at the coupling nodes. The Scandinavian
grid has 269 nodes and 370 edges, counting multiple-circuit lines only once.
Cascading failures are simulated for ﬁxed power injections P
i for each node
corresponding to an economic dispatch for the entire PyPSA-Eur model that
includes a security margin given by the constraint jFi!jj ≤ 0:8 /C1Fmax
i!j . The cascade is
triggered by the failure of a single line ( r, s) which is effectively removed from the
grid. The simulation then proceeds step-wise; In each step, we ﬁrst calculate the
nodal phase angles ϑi and real power ﬂows Fi→j for all nodes and lines, respectively,
by solving the continuity equation Pi = ∑jFi→j with Fi→j = Aij(ϑi − ϑj). Then we
check for overloads: Any line ( i, j) with jFi!jj >F max
i!j undergoes an emergency
shutdown and is removed from the grid. The simulations are stopped when no
further overload occurs or when the grid is disconnected.
Note that this mechanism for cascading failures is different from the cascading
failure mechanism typically analysed in node capacity load models (see e.g.
refs.
45,46). The redistribution of nodal loads or ﬂows after failures in such models is
typically based on the neighbourhood of nodes, on shortest path betweenness
measures or on other ‘intelligent’ redistribution schemes whereas the redistribution
of ﬂows after failures in linear ﬂow networks or power grids studied using AC load
ﬂow analysis are given by the physical laws governing electrical networks.
Furthermore, in most cases nodes —not edges—are assumed to fail, which is not the
typical case in real power grids.
Processing leaf data . The leaf venation network is based on a microscopic
recording of a leaf of the species Bursera hollickii provided by the authors of ref. 47.
Edge weights Aij are assumed to scale with the radius rij of the corresponding vein
(i, j)a s Aij / r4
ij according to the Hagen –Poisseuille law, see ref. 28 for a detailed
discussion. We used the radius in pixel scanned at a resolution of 6400 dpi.
Parametrising network isolators with four edges . Consider a network isolator
that connects two vertices from one module with two vertices in the other module
and consists of four edges in total (see Fig. 3a, right). Denote the weights of the four
edges by a
1, a2, a3, a4 and assume that we ﬁx the overall available weight to build
the network isolator. Including the rank conditions, the edge weights have to satisfy
two constraints,
∑
4
‘¼1
a‘ ¼ A ¼ 4
rank a1 a2
a3 a4
/C18/C19/C18/C19
¼ 1 ) a1 /C1a4 ¼ a2 /C1a3;
thus leaving two degrees of freedom. We can then solve this set of equations for
two variables and treat the remaining ones, a3, a4, as parameters that are varied
independently:
a1 ¼ a3
ðA /C0a4 /C0a3Þ
a3 þ a4
; a2 ¼ a4
ðA /C0a4 /C0a3Þ
a3 þ a4
:
For the simulations shown in Fig. 5c, d. we have set A ¼ 4.
Varying the degree of non-linearity . To vary the degree of non-linearity sys-
tematically in Fig. 5,w e ﬁrst randomly assign 25% of the nodes to be identical
sources and the remaining ones to be identical sinks and choose their value such
that Eq. (3) is fulﬁlled. We then calculate the non-linear ﬂows by combining Eq. ( 2)
with the non-linear ﬂows (Eq. ( 11)). For sources, we set Pi = 0.09 (bright line)
initially and then systematically increase (decrease) the injections at all sources
(sinks) by the factors 3.5, 6.0, 8.5, 11 (lines from light to dark) up until a maximum
value of P
i = 0.99 is reached (black line) which corresponds to a maximum ﬂow in
the network of j~Fjmax ¼ 0:89.
Data availability
The topology of the Scandinavian power grid, the Central European power grid and the
British power grid have been extracted from the open European energy system model
PyPSA-Eur
44, which is fully available online at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3886532.
Leaf data was provided by the authors of ref. 47 and is available from the respective
authors upon reasonable request.
Code availability
Computer code will be made available at https://github.com/FNKaiser/
Inhibiting_Failure_Spreading upon publication.
Received: 26 October 2020; Accepted: 19 April 2021;
References
1. Albert, R., Jeong, H. & Barabási, A.-L. Error and attack tolerance of complex
networks. Nature 406, 378 –382 (2000).
2. Yang, Y., Nishikawa, T. & Motter, A. E. Small vulnerable sets determine large
network cascades in power grids. Science 358, eaan3184 (2017).
3. Pourbeik, P., Kundur, P. & Taylor, C. The anatomy of a power grid blackout -
root causes and dynamics of recent major blackouts. IEEE Power Energy Mag.
4,2 2 –29 (2006).
ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9
8 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:3143 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
4. Witthaut, D., Rohden, M., Zhang, X., Hallerberg, S. & Timme, M. Critical
links and nonlocal rerouting in complex supply networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 116,
138701 (2016).
5. Sack, L., Dietrich, E. M., Streeter, C. M., Sanchez-Gomez, D. & Holbrook, N.
M. Leaf palmate venation and vascular redundancy confer tolerance of
hydraulic disruption. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 105, 1567 –1572 (2008).
6. Dunne, J. A. & Williams, R. J. Cascading extinctions and community collapse in
model food webs. Philos. Transact. Royal Soc. B: Biol. Sci.364, 1711–1723 (2009).
7. Strogatz, S. H. Exploring complex networks. Nature 410, 268 (2001).
8. Sahasrabudhe, S. & Motter, A. E. Rescuing ecosystems from extinction
cascades through compensatory perturbations. Nat. Commun. 2, 170 (2011).
9. Motter, A. E. Cascade Control and Defense in Complex Networks. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 93, 098701 (2004).
10. D ’Souza, R. M. Curtailing cascading failures. Science 358, 860 –861 (2017).
11. Lin, Y., Burghardt, K., Rohden, M., Noël, P.-A. & D ’Souza, R. M. Self-
organization of dragon king failures. Phys. Rev. E 98, 022127 (2018).
12. Stouffer, D. B. & Bascompte, J. Compartmentalization increases food-web
persistence. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 108, 3648 –3652 (2011).
13. Gilarranz, L. J., Ray ﬁeld, B., Liñán-Cembrano, G., Bascompte, J. & Gonzalez,
A. Effects of network modularity on the spread of perturbation impact in
experimental metapopulations. Science 357, 199 –201 (2017).
14. Hens, C., Harush, U., Haber, S., Cohen, R. & Barzel, B. Spatiotemporal signal
propagation in complex networks. Nat. Phys. 15, 403 (2019).
15. Brummitt, C. D., D ’Souza, R. M. & Leicht, E. A. Suppressing cascades of load
in interdependent networks. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 109, E680 –E689 (2012).
16. Radicchi, F., Castellano, C., Cecconi, F., Loreto, V. & Parisi, D. De ﬁning and
identifying communities in networks.Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.101, 2658–2663 (2004).
17. Girvan, M. & Newman, M. E. J. Community structure in social and biological
networks. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 99, 7821 –7826 (2002).
18. Newman, M. E. J. Communities, modules and large-scale structure in
networks. Nat. Phys. 8,2 5
–31 (2012).
19. Lasseter, R. H. Microgrids. In 2002 IEEE Power Engineering Society Winter
Meeting. Conference Proceedings (Cat. No. 02CH37309) , vol. 1, 305 –308 (IEEE,
2002).
20. Mureddu, M., Caldarelli, G., Damiano, A., Scala, A. & Meyer-Ortmanns, H.
Islanding the power grid on the transmission level: less connections for more
security. Sci. Rep. 6, 34797 (2016).
21. Schlachtberger, D. P., Brown, T., Schramm, S. & Greiner, M. The bene ﬁts of
cooperation in a highly renewable european electricity network. Energy 134,
469–481 (2017).
22. Tröndle, T., Lilliestam, J., Marelli, S. & Pfenninger, S. Trade-offs between
geographic scale, cost, and infrastructure requirements for fully renewable
electricity in europe. Joule 4, 1929 –1948 (2020).
23. Gavrilchenko, T. & Katifori, E. Resilience in hierarchical ﬂuid ﬂow networks.
Phys. Rev. E 99, 012321 (2019).
24. Purchala, K., Meeus, L., Dommelen, D. V. & Belmans, R. Usefulness of dc
power ﬂow for active power ﬂow analysis. In IEEE Power Engineering Society
General Meeting , Vol. 1, 454 –459 (IEEE, 2005).
25. Strake, J., Kaiser, F., Basiri, F., Ronellen ﬁtsch, H. & Witthaut, D. Non-local
impact of link failures in linear ﬂow networks. N J. Phys. 21, 053009 (2019).
26. Stott, B., Jardim, J. & Alsac, O. DC Power Flow Revisited. IEEE Transact.
Power Syst. 24, 1290 –1300 (2009).
27. Katifori, E., Szöll ősi, G. J. & Magnasco, M. O. Damage and ﬂuctuations induce
loops in optimal transport networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 048704 (2010).
28. Coomes, D. A., Heathcote, S., Godfrey, E. R., Shepherd, J. J. & Sack, L. Scaling
of xylem vessels and veins within the leaves of oak species. Biol. Lett. 4,
302–306 (2008).
29. Manik, D. et al. Network susceptibilities: theory and applications. Phys. Rev. E
95, 012319 (2017).
30. Newman, M. E. J. Networks: An introduction (Oxford University Press, 2010).
31. Fortunato, S. Community detection in graphs. Phys. Rep. 486,7 5–174 (2010).
32. Kaiser, F., Strake, J. & Witthaut, D. Collective effects of link failures in linear
ﬂow networks. N J. Phys. 22
, 013053 (2020).
33. Kettemann, S. Delocalization of disturbances and the stability of ac electricity
grids. Phys. Rev. E 94, 062311 (2015).
34. Erd ős, P. On the evolution of random graphs. Publ. Math. Inst. Hungarian
Acad. Sci. 5,1 7 –61 (1960).
35. Pecora, L. M., Sorrentino, F., Hagerstrom, A. M., Murphy, T. E. & Roy, R.
Cluster synchronization and isolated desynchronization in complex networks
with symmetries. Nat. Commun. 5,1 –8 (2014).
36. Sorrentino, F., Pecora, L. M., Hagerstrom, A. M., Murphy, T. E. & Roy, R.
Complete characterization of the stability of cluster synchronization in
complex dynamical networks. Sci. Adv. 2, e1501737 (2016).
37. Nicosia, V., Valencia, M., Chavez, M., Díaz-Guilera, A. & Latora, V. Remote
Synchronization Reveals Network Symmetries and Functional Modules. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 110, 174102 (2013).
38. Tropp, J. A. & Wright, S. J. Computational methods for sparse solution of
linear inverse problems. Proc. IEEE 98, 948 –958 (2010).
39. Schäfer, B., Witthaut, D., Timme, M. & Latora, V. Dynamically induced
cascading failures in power grids. Nat. Commun. 9, 1975 (2018).
40. Dör ﬂer, F. & Bullo, F. Synchronization in complex networks of phase
oscillators: a survey. Automatica 50, 1539 –1564 (2014).
41. Rodrigues, F. A., Peron, T. K. D., Ji, P. & Kurths, J. The kuramoto model in
complex networks. Phys. Rep. 610,1 –98 (2016).
42. Wood, A. J., Wollenberg, B. F. & Sheblé, G. B. Power Generation, Operation
and Control . (John Wiley & Sons, 2014).
43. Nematzadeh, A., Ferrara, E., Flammini, A. & Ahn, Y.-Y. Optimal Network
Modularity for Information Diffusion. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 8 (2014).
44. Hörsch, J., Hofmann, F., Schlachtberger, D. & Brown, T. PyPSA-eur: an open
optimisation model of the european transmission system. Energy Strategy Rev.
22, 207 –215 (2018).
45. Motter, A. E. & Lai, Y.-C. Cascade-based attacks on complex networks. Phys.
Rev. E 66, 065102 (2002).
46. Crucitti, P., Latora, V. & Marchiori, M. Model for cascading failures in
complex networks. Phys. Rev. E 69, 045104 (2004).
47. Ronellen ﬁtsch, H., Lasser, J., Daly, D. C. & Katifori, E. Topological Phenotypes
Constitute a New Dimension in the Phenotypic Space of Leaf Venation
Networks. PLOS Comput. Biol. 11, e1004680 (2015).
Acknowledgements
We thank Tom Brown and Jonas Hörsch for help with the processing of power grid data,
Eleni Katifori and Henrik Ronellen ﬁtsch for providing the leaf data and Raissa D ’Souza
and Jürgen Kurths for valuable discussions. We gratefully acknowledge support from the
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF grant no. 03EK3055B D.W.), the
Helmholtz Association (via the joint initiative “Energy System 2050 —a Contribution of
the Research Field Energy ” and grant no. VH-NG-1025 to D.W.). V.L. ’s work was funded
by the Leverhulme Trust Research Fellowship CREATE.
Author contributions
D.W. conceived research and acquired funding. F.K., V.L. and D.W. designed research.
F.K. carried out all numerical simulations, evaluated the results and designed all ﬁgures.
All authors contributed to discussing the results and writing the paper.
Funding
Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to D.W.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewer(s) for
their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2021
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:3143 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23292-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 9