Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Active inference as a model of collision
avoidance behavior in human drivers
Julian F. Schumann 1, Johan Engström2 , Leif Johnson2, Matthew O’Kelly2,
Joao Messias2, Jens Kober 1 & Arkady Zgonnikov 1
Collision avoidance– involving a rapid threat detection and quick execution of
the appropriate evasive maneuver– is a critical aspect of driving. However,
existing models of human collision avoidance behavior are fragmented,
focusing on speciﬁc scenarios or only describing certain aspects of the
avoidance behavior, such as responsetimes. This paper addresses these gaps
by proposing a computational cognitive model of human collision avoidance
behavior based on active inference. Active inference provides a uniﬁed
approach to modeling human behavior: the minimization of free energy.
Building on prior active inference work, our model incorporates established
cognitive mechanisms such as evidence accumulation to simulate human
responses in three distinct collision avoidance scenarios: front-to-rear lead
vehicle braking, lateral incursion by an oncoming vehicle, and another vehicle
failing to yield at an intersection. We demonstrate that our model explains a
wide range of empirical ﬁndings on human collision avoidance behavior.
Speciﬁcally, the model closely reproduces both aggregate results from meta-
analyses previously reported in the literature and detailed, scenario-speciﬁc
effects observed in two recent driving simulator studies, including response
timing, maneuver selection, and execution. Our results highlight the potential
of active inference as a generalizable framework for understanding and
modeling human behavior in complex real-life driving tasks.
Main
Collision avoidance is a critical skill for human drivers. It involves
the rapid detection of threats (such as a vehicle ahead suddenly
braking) and deciding on an appropriate evasive maneuver (for
instance, braking or swerving). These maneuvers are complex,
requiring not only precise execution but also continuous adjust-
ments as the situation evolves. Furthermore, drivers need to
account for the uncertainty in the future behavior of other road
users: for example, will an oncoming vehicle encroaching into my
lane continue across or move back to its own lane? Understanding
how humans avoid collisions in trafﬁc can provide insights into high-
stakes, split-second decision making which has substantial implica-
tions for traf ﬁc safety.
Behavior models play a key role both in understanding the
mechanisms of human collision avoidance and in improving traf ﬁc
safety. These models are applied in diverse contexts, such as collision
risk estimation
1, understanding effects of driver distraction2, modeling
take-over behavior3, representing human agents in simulated test
environments4, and providing behavioral benchmarks for automated
vehicles5,6. Besides immediate practical applications, modeling human
collision avoidance behavior is an interesting subject of study in its
own right. Being a highly complex and dynamic task with extremely
Received: 2 June 2025
Accepted: 6 May 2026
Check for updates
1Department of Cognitive Robotics, Delft University of Technology, Delft, Netherlands.2Waymo LLC, Mountain View, CA, USA.
e-mail: jengstrom@waymo.com
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
high stakes, collision avoidance provides a unique testbed for theories
and models of cognition previously not validated in the real world7–9.
Most existing computational models of human collision avoid-
ance are mechanistic, that is, are based on the explicit modeling of
cognitive mechanisms underlying response timing and evasive man-
euvering. However, they are typically fragmented, focusing either on
speciﬁc scenario types (e.g., front-to-rear con ﬂicts
10–12 or merging13),
speciﬁc explanatory factors (such as off-road glances 1,14 or cognitive
load2), or only reproduce certain aspects of human behavior (such as
response times3,6,10,11,15 or the extent of steering 16). Altogether, these
models cover a wide range of scenarios and diverse aspects of collision
avoidance behavior. Yet, each one of these mechanistic models on its
own is highly speciﬁc: they are not designed to generalize to multiple
scenarios or describe multiple aspects of human behavior.
Recently, machine learning models based on large datasets of
human driving have demonstrated the ability to generalize across a
wide range of traf ﬁc scenarios
17–22. Because such models typically
generate full motion trajectories , they also have the potential to
represent multiple aspects of collision avoidance behavior and not just
a single metric of interest. However, a key challenge is that safety-
critical behavior, such as collision avoidance, is often under-
represented in the datasets used for training
23, which makes it hard
to achieve representative human-like collision avoidance behavior
solely based on learning from data
24.
Thus, there is currently a lack of models that can capture the key
aspects of human collision avoidance behavior (response selection,
timing, and execution) all at the same time and across different sce-
narios. This limits both practical applications (due to the need to
develop a new model for every new scenario) and fundamental
understanding of cognitive mechanisms underlying the behavior of
humans in safety-critical situations in trafﬁc (due to the lack of a uni-
ﬁed explanation for multiple aspects of behavior).
To address this gap, here we present a model of human collision
avoidance behavior based on active inference. Originating in compu-
tational neuroscience, active inference is a versatile general framework
for understanding and modeling sentient behavior in living
systems
25–27 that has been previously used to model human behavior in
diverse contexts 28–32, including the modeling of human driver
behavior33 such as car following 34, responses to driving automation
failures15, and managing uncertainty around occlusions and non-
driving-related tasks35. Building on the model of Engström et al.35,o u r
active inference model is designed to reproduce a wide spectrum of
human behavior (e.g., chosen maneuver, reaction timing, collision
likelihood, etc.) in response to potential collisions. To this end, our
model incorporates several well-known cognitive mechanisms to
represent the dynamics of human decision making in response to
sudden stimuli, such as looming perception
36,37 and evidence
accumulation38–41. We evaluated our model against a range of pre-
viously reported empirical ﬁndings in three paradigmatic collision
avoidance scenarios: 1) the front-to-rear scenario, where a driver needs
to respond to a suddenly braking vehicle in front, 2) the opposite-
direction lateral incursion scenario, where an oncoming vehicle sud-
denly cuts across the driver’s path, and 3) the intersection right-turn-
into-path scenario, where a vehicle coming from the right on a per-
pendicular road does not yield when turning right into the driver ’s
lane. Testing the model in three markedly different scenarios allowed
us to investigate the potential of active inference as a framework for
generalizable modeling of human collision avoidance behavior.
Results
In this work, we use active inference as an overarching framework to
guide the modeling. The key premise of active inference is that all
behavior and cognition can be understood based on the single prin-
ciple of minimizing free energy. An agent minimizing free energy can
be conceptually understood as the agent sensing and acting upon the
world in such a way as to minimize its surprise over time. In the active
inference framework, this amounts to seeking out observations that
are expected (unsurprising) and preferred given the type of creature
the agent is, reﬂecting its adaptation to its particular environment or
niche (e.g., aﬁsh expects and prefers the sensation of being immersed
in water). Agents capable of planning into the future and modeling the
consequences of their actions (such as human car drivers), select plans
that minimize the expected surprise, or more generally, the expected
free energy (EFE)
25.
Our model implements these principles in the collision avoidance
context (Fig. 1). Speciﬁcally, the modeled agent repeatedly evaluates
possible futures under its current policy (i.e., a sequence of planned
actions) – including interactions with other road users – in terms of
their EFE. The driver then selects policies that minimize EFE by rea-
lizing observations that align with the driver ’s preferences, such as
avoiding collisions (yielding pragmatic value) while obtaining new
information to reduce uncertainty in the agent ’s beliefs about the
future (yielding epistemic value)
25,35.
Fundamentally, agents cannot have perfect knowledge of the
mechanisms underlying the surrounding world (the generative pro-
cess), but instead rely on an internal, not necessarily veridical, repre-
sentation of their beliefs about the environment, the generative
model25. Importantly, an (ego) agent’s generative modelis probabilistic,
with the uncertainty about the state of the world being represented by
a set of sample particles. Our model implements these general prin-
ciples in a time-discrete, sequential process (Fig.2) which incorporates
a number of key perceptual, cognitive, and motor mechanisms.
Looming-based perception
First, the agent observes the world and updates its belief (Fig. 2a),
combining these observations with the expectations derived from
the generative model propagating its previous belief forward in time.
The model assumes that the agent cannot directly perceive kine-
matic states of surrounding objects (e.g., positions and velocities),
but instead uses the readily available perceptual information
37: the
object’s visual angle φ subtended at the driver ’s retina, and its deri-
vative, the angular rate _φ , commonly referred to as looming36,42,43.
The model then infers back the kinematic state from those obser-
vations, where – with increasing distances– equal variations in φ lead
to increasingly larger variations in the inferred distance and there-
fore increasing uncertainty about the kinematic state of the other
agent. In addition, the agent ’s perception accuracy is limited: it
cannot perceive looming with absolute values below a threshold
_φ
0
44,45. Due to this threshold, the agent is unable to detect small
relative velocities at long distances; our model thus incorporates this
looming threshold as one possible mechanism behind delays in
recognizing events like the abrupt braking of a lead vehicle.
Behavior prediction via norm-conditioned particleﬁlter
After perceiving the environment, the ego agent predicts the other
vehicle’sb e h a v i o r( F i g .2b). For this, our model uses a sample-based
approach35,46 based on a particle ﬁlter. Speci ﬁcally, the samples
representing the agent’s updated belief about the other vehicle are
propagated forward by the generative model (in our case, using a
bicycle model with additive Gaussian noise). In this way, the model
generates multiple distinct kinematically plausible future trajectories
of the other vehicle, including the ones that could potentially lead to a
collision. This enables the model to anticipate rare, long-tail behaviors
of the other vehicle and respond to them appropriately during colli-
sion avoidance, but yields overly pessimistic predictions in non-
conﬂict situations. For instance, widely dispersed predictions could
lead the agent to anticipate any vehicles in the adjacent lane potentially
encroaching into its lane, incentivizing unnecessary evasive actions.
Thus, relying solely on kinematic likelihood for the generation of
these samples would lead to overly cautious behavior. In reality,
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 2
human drivers typically must assume that other road users follow
trafﬁcr u l e s47,48 and other social norms for driving 49 to allow for ef ﬁ-
cient interaction. To re ﬂect this, our model ’ss a m p l i n gp r o c e s si s
biased towards trajectories that are not only kinematically feasible but
also normatively likely, that is, aligned with societal normative expec-
tations on how to behave on the road
50. We refer to this biased sam-
pling process as anorm-conditioned particleﬁlter.I ne f f e c t ,t h em o d e l’s
belief about the other vehicle’sf u t u r et r a j e c t o r yi si n i t i a l l yc o n s t r a i n e d
by normative expectations, such as that vehicles typically remain
within their lane unless there is evidence to suggest otherwise. At the
same time, the normative probability is bounded from above: trajec-
tories where norm compliance stays constant or improves over time
compared to the starting state are assigned an equal normative like-
lihood, while those with decreasing norm compliance are deemed less
likely. Thus, when another vehicle unexpectedly causes a conﬂict (for
example, by encroaching into the ego vehicle’s lane), the model relaxes
the assumption of that vehicle ’s future norm-compliance as well,
sampling norm-violating trajectories as long as they remain kinemati-
cally plausible.
While there is generally a large set of normative expectations
dependent on cultural inﬂuence, we chose to only implement speciﬁc
norm-inﬂuencing behaviors in each scenario (e.g., staying in one’sl a n e
or yielding to the right of way, see Supplementary Fig. 1). A general-
ized, scenario-independent implementation of such norms is feasible,
but with the goal of computational efﬁciency was not pursued here.
Re-planning full policy based on accumulating surprise
In the next step, based on the set of previously predicted possible
trajectories of the other vehicle, the agent considers its own policy,
evaluating its current suitability by calculating the residual
information51 of the pragmatic value, which can be seen as a measure of
surprise. This surprise signal – the (scaled) negative pragmatic value
associated with the currently selected policy – essentially indicates
how unsuitable the current policy is given the model ’sp r e f e r r e d
observations and how the situation is expected to develop. The model
assumes that the driver continuously accumulates this surprise signal
as evidence in favor of full policy re-plan (Fig.2c). On each time step, if
the accumulated evidence has not reached a predeﬁned threshold, the
agent considers it sufﬁcient to continue with the current policy, and
extends this policy one time step into the future (Fig. 2d.i and e.i).
However, if enough evidence in favor of the current policy being
unsuitable is accumulated, a set of completely new policies is sampled
and a new full policy is selected (Fig.2d.ii and e.ii). Theﬁrst action from
either the extended or the new full policy is then applied to update the
environment for the next time step (Fig. 2f). This mechanism, where
policy re-planning is contingent on the accumulation of evidence, thus
provides a way to represent the dynamics of human decision making
and response timing in the model.
Constrained policy sampling
When proposing new candidate policies, either for extension (Fig.2d.i)
or full re-plan (Fig. 2d.ii), the model uses the cross-entropy method52.
With this method, candidate actions are iteratively resampled,
increasingly focusing on the most promising areas of the action space.
To represent humans ’ bounded capacity for planning under time
pressure13,53–56, we limit the number of evaluated policies in this pro-
cess. Importantly, the sampled acceleration values are constrained to
reﬂect that humans operate the gas and brake pedals with one foot.
Fig. 1 | An illustration of the key principles of our active inference model in the
opposite-direction lateral incursion scenario.Upper left panel: The modeled
agent (at the bottom, facing forward) is continuously generating beliefs (repre-
sented by the arrows) about how the current driving situation will play out and what
future observations it will make as a consequence of its own actions and the actions
of the other vehicle. In “normal", non-conﬂict situations, the situation typically
plays out as expected. The agent thus initially believes with high certainty that both
itself and the oncoming vehicle will remain in their lanes and pass each other safely.
This yields low expected free energy (EFE; green arrows) since the agent’s expected
(and thus preferred) observations (e.g., making progress, avoid collisions) are
aligned with the actual observations. Upper right panel: When the oncoming
vehicle suddenly encroaches into the driver’s lane, the EFE increases rapidly (as
indicated by the red arrows) because this new situation is likely to result in an
observed collision in the future, which is strongly disfavored by the agent. In this
situation, the agent’s belief about the oncoming vehicle’s future trajectory also
becomes more uncertain, because the other vehicle can no longer be trusted to
follow established trafﬁc norms. The agent thus needs to imagine a better future
with lower EFE -- in this case, a scenario where it avoids collision by swerving left
(lower left panel) and takes action to make that better future come true (lower
right panel).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 3
These constraints include limiting applied jerks (as humans cannot
press or release pedals instantaneously) and enforcing a constant
holding time of 0.2 s at acceleration a
0 ≲ 0m s−2 during transitions in
both directions between acceleration and deceleration (as humans
cannot move their foot between pedals instantaneously).
Policy selection via expected free energy minimization
Among the sampled candidate policies, the model aims to ﬁnd the
policy that minimizes expected free energy (EFE) – the cornerstone of
the active inference framework (Fig. 2e.i and e.ii). In our model, the
pragmatic value part of the EFE is maximized by (1) maintaining a
desired longitudinal velocity, (2) staying within the current lane
(avoiding unnecessary or unsafe lane changes) and on the road, (3)
minimizing control inputs (avoid harsh braking or steering), (4)
preventing collisions or at least reducing their severity (measured by
the relative impact velocity), and (5) maintaining suf ﬁcient safety
margins, avoiding situations where collisions may become unavoid-
able (such as when following a vehicle too closely without a sufﬁcient
stopping distance). Finally, maximizing epistemic value encourages
6) policies that are expected to result in a wide variety of reliable
observations, which may help reducing uncertainty
35. However, in
the present collision avoidance setting, behavior is mainly expected
to be driven by pragmatic, rather than epistemic, value since there is
not much the driver can do to reduce uncertainty, especially given
that we here assume that the other vehicle is non-reactive to the ego
agent’s actions.
Model evaluation
We evaluated the model against human data in three scenarios.
First, in the front-to-rear scenario, we compared the model to the
results of a meta-analysis of brake response times 57 in experimental
driving simulator and ﬁeld studies (e.g., Brookhuis et al. 58 and Lee
et al.59), and an analysis of deceleration magnitudes reported in ref.14
based on two real-world driving datasets captured across the US (the
SHRP2 dataset
60) and Africa (the ANNEXT dataset61).
Second, in the opposite-direction lateral incursion scenario, the
model was compared to human data from a driving simulator study
conducted in the UK
62, which was conducted in parallel to the pre-
sent work. Thus, by contrast to the model evaluation for the front-to-
rear scenario, which was based on aggregated data, we were here
able to run our model on nearly identical scenarios for which the
human data was collected, allowing for more detailed comparisons.
We manually ﬁtted the model parameters to reproduce human
behavior in the ﬁrst two scenarios; the same parameter values were
used for both scenarios.
Third, to test the ability of the model to generalize to new sce-
narios, we tested it, with the same parameter settings, in an unseen
third scenario conducted in Canada
63, an intersection right-turn-into-
path scenario where another vehicle failed to yield the right of way.
Similarly to the lateral incursion scenario, we were able to closely
reproduce the scenarios faced by the human participants.
Front-to-rear scenario. In the front-to-rear scenario, the ego vehicle
trails the other vehicle, which is driving in the same lane; both vehicles
have the same initial velocity, which was systematically varied in our
simulations together with the initial time gap between the vehicles.
After a short time of driving at constant speed, the other vehicle starts
braking with a high constant deceleration until coming to a stop.
Depending on the initial kinematics of the vehicles, the ego agent can
avoid a collision either solely by braking (Fig.3a) or combined braking
and swerving (Fig. 3b). The model sometimes avoided a collision by
swerving only (i.e., without braking). However, since existing results in
the literature on front-to-rear scenarios typically only report on brak-
ing response performance, we only compared our model ’sb r a k e
response times to the human response data (i.e., for the analysis of
those, steering only responses were not considered).
At lower speeds and larger time gaps, the model typically avoids
collisions by braking only. In a representative simulation (Fig.3a), after
the leading agent started braking att =0 . 8s( ﬁrst dashed line), it took
the model 0.6 s to perceive this (see the ego agent ’s belief in the
Fig. 2 | Main functional components of our active inference collision
avoidance model. At each time step, the ego agent observes the world state,
updates its belief about the world (a), and makes probabilistic predictions about
the actions of the other agent (where future trajectories that adhere to trafﬁc norms
are prioritized) (b). At every time step, the agent accumulates evidence (as mea-
sured by surprise associated with the current state of the world) on the unsuitability
of the current policy (c). If the accumulated evidence reaches a threshold, the agent
re-plans the entire policy, selecting the one that minimizes the expected free
energy (EFE) (d.ii and e.ii). Otherwise, it continues using its current policy in an
extend form -- i.e., only sampling and then selecting the policy’sl a s tt i m es t e p(d.i
and e.i). The ﬁrst action in the new or extended policy is then applied to the
environment (f).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 4
acceleration plot). At that point ( t = 1.4 s, second dashed line), the
model recognized the imminent conﬂict resulting from this change in
perceived behavior of the other vehicle, as can be seen by the sudden
decrease (increase in negative value) in the collision part of the prag-
matic value. This leads to a corresponding increase in the rate of
accumulation of the evidence for a re-plan (i.e., surprise). However, it
still took another 0.6 s until the accumulated evidence E reached the
threshold, delaying the ﬁrst noticeable agent reaction to t =2s( t h i r d
dashed line), where the agent started to execute a new policy –
emergency braking. This policy was selected because it allowed the
agent to drastically reduce its EFE via reaching future states with high
pragmatic value, in particular thanks to low collision probability. This
policy was preferred over the alternative policy of braking and steering
into the adjacent lane because the pragmatic value associated with
lane changing was more negative than that associated with lower
velocity, as the desired (corresponding to the initial) velocity is com-
paratively low. However, even under this policy, at t = 2 s, the accel-
eration has still not changed, due to the pedal constraints.
Consequently, the ﬁrst deceleration of the model can be observed at
t = 2.2 s, resulting in a total response time of 1.4 s.
Smaller time gaps and higher initial velocities can make it kine-
matically impossible to avoid a collision by braking only. In such
situations, the model typically opts to steer and brake at the same time
(Fig. 3b). Here, due to the smaller initial distance, the model ’sp e r -
ception delay was noticeably shorter (being only about 0.2 s, with the
modeled agent perceiving the braking at t = 1 s, the ﬁrst dashed line).
Fig. 3 | Evaluation of the model in the front-to-rear scenario. a In a scenario
where initial pre-conﬂict kinematics are such that collision can be avoided by
braking (initial vehicle velocitiesv0 =1 5m s−1, a bumper-to-bumper time gap of 1.5 s),
the model typically produces braking-only behavior. The sub-panels visualize the
top-down view of the scenario, the time dynamics of both vehicles' velocity v,
accelerationa, steering angle δ and (for the ego vehicle) the components of the
pragmatic valueGprag (scaled with the evidence accumulation gainλ) that underlie
the accumulated evidence towards a full policy re-plan.b In a scenario where
braking on its own might not be suf ﬁcient to avoid collision (v0 =2 5m s−1, 1 s time
gap), the model selects a policy that involves both braking and steering towards the
opposite lane (see the model’s selected policies in the topmost plots). c The like-
lihood of the ego vehicle deciding to brake and stay behind the leading other
vehicle (without any steering) as a function of time gap, with the four lines repre-
senting four different velocities (ranging from 10 ms
−1 to 25 ms−1). This data includes
those samples where the agent is only steering.d The relationship between the time
gap and the brake response time of the ego agent in 896 model simulations
(see Supplementary Information 3.1). The regression line based on a meta-analysis
of human brake response times
57 is shown for reference. e The relationship of the
inverse time-to-collision (TTC) at brake onset (deﬁned as
maxf0, vego/C0vOV g
Δx )a n dt h e
lowest observed deceleration. The regression line based on the human deceleration
magnitude data14 is shown for reference. Video replays of the example simulations
are available in the Supplementary Information as Supplementary_Movie_1.mp4 (a)
and Supplementary_Movie_2.mp4 (b).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 5
However, due to the more challenging initial kinematics, it was more
difﬁcult for the model to avoid collision, despite the shorter percep-
tion delay. In particular, the model switched between different policies
three times. Initially, the model recognized the need to slightly brake
and then steer around the other vehicle: already at the time of theﬁrst
re-plan (t = 1.4 s, second dashed line), the collision component of EFE
was substantially reduced by the chosen policy. This policy was mostly
sufﬁcient in improving the collision component of the pragmatic
value, but as visible in the top panel (planned trajectory eX
ego), the
agent intends to stay in between lanes for an extended period. This led
to two further re-plans (t =3 . 6sa n dt = 5.4 s, third and fourth dashed
lines respectively) to adjust the trajectory. However, even having
passed the other vehicle already, the model is not completely suc-
cessful, with a noticeable lateral position component remaining in the
pragmatic value. As the optimal solution of driving in the center of the
current lane on a free road should have maximized the pragmatic
value, this remaining lateral error is likely the result of the cross-
entropy method not identifying the optimal policy. This represents a
bounded planning capacity which, as discussed above, is also present
in humans
13,53–56 and thus an intended feature of our model.
By systematically varying the initial kinematics of the vehicles, we
assessed the model behavior across a spectrum of front-to-rear sce-
narios. Due to the stochasticity of the model (foremost in behavior
prediction and policy sampling), for each of the 28 sets of initial con-
ditions, we ran the simulation of the front-to-rear scenario 32 times.
Based on these simulations, we analyzed the model ’sc h o s e ne v a s i v e
maneuver, response time, and deceleration magnitude and compared
it to human data reported in the driver behavior literature. Figure 3c
shows the probability that the model will brake only (without steering)
for different velocities and time gaps. Existing studies on how human
evasive maneuver choice depends on scenario kinematics in front-to-
rear scenarios are limited. Thus, we compared our model results to the
few related studies that exist, but these do not provide suf ﬁciently
detailed analyses for rigorously evaluating our model’s evasive man-
euvering decisions. These studies generally suggest that evasive
maneuver decisions, similar to response timing, depend on the sce-
nario kinematics (see ref. 62 for a review). Avoiding collisions is gen-
erally kinematically more feasible by braking at lower speeds and by
steering at higher speeds
64 and human drivers tend to swerve into an
adjacent lane if a kinematically viable escape path exists62,65–67. In line
with these general observations, our model prefers braking at lower
velocities and favors combined swerving-and-braking or swerving only
responses at higher velocities, regardless of the time gap (Fig. 3c). At
medium velocities (15 ms
−1) the model behavior is sensitive to the gap
between the vehicles: the longer the time gap, the higher the prob-
ability of a brake-only maneuver. This pattern re ﬂects a trade-off
between the components of the pragmatic values associated with
collisions, control effort (harshness of braking and steering), and lat-
eral position. In more urgent scenarios (short time gaps), the model
prefers swerving due to the low pragmatic value of harsh braking.
Conversely, in less urgent scenarios (larger time gaps), the model opts
for braking since moderate braking avoids collision without incurring
the signiﬁcant reduction of pragmatic value due to leaving the lane
(while the deviation from the desired velocity is still tolerable at those
medium speeds). These speci ﬁc dependencies of evasive maneuver
choice on scenario kinematics have, to our knowledge, not been
empirically tested and represent interesting quantitative predictions
from our model.
Regarding brake response times, empirical studies have con-
sistently found a strong dependence on scenario kinematics
2,3,6,14,57,68,69.
Speciﬁcally, more kinematically urgent scenarios (e.g., with a small
initial time gap and/or hard lead vehicle braking) lead to shorter
response times while less urgent scenarios lead to longer response
times, with approximately a linear relationship between measures of
urgency (e.g., the initial time gap) and mean response time
6,57.O u r
model produced behavior that is remarkably consistent with these
ﬁndings (Fig. 3d). Interestingly, compared to the evasive maneuver
decisions, velocities do not seem to signi ﬁcantly in ﬂuence brake
response times, nor does the ﬁnal chosen evasive behavior. Further-
more, model response times remain consistent (approx. 1 s) over the
range of short time gaps (0.5 s to 1.5 s). This last result could be a
consequence of the evidence accumulation mechanism requiring a
certain minimum time to trigger a re-plan, even at a very high rate of
incoming evidence. Relatedly, the lack of fast enough responses at
short time gaps is a likely explanation for the collisions observed in the
model (only at the shortest time gap of 0.5 s). However, because the
data reported in the literature does not cover such short time gaps, this
model prediction remains to be tested in future studies.
While response selection and its timing are comprehensively
characterized by the choice of evasive maneuver and response times,
response execution is a dynamic process and can be characterized by a
variety of metrics. Here we focus on deceleration magnitude, which
has been previously shown to depend on the kinematics of the front-
to-rear scenario: human drivers brake harder in more kinematically
urgent scenarios
14. Our model captured this phenomenon: the mag-
nitude of its braking increased with the inverse time-to-collision at
brake onset (Fig. 3e). This behavior of the model can be explained by
the pragmatic value trade-off between avoiding a collision on the one
hand and avoiding the effort of hard braking and losing velocity on the
other hand. In other words, the model aimed to not brake harder than
necessary to avoid collision.
Opposite-direction lateral incursion scenario. For evaluating model
behavior in the opposite-direction lateral incursion scenario, we used
human data from a driving simulator study at the University of Leeds,
UK, reported by Johnson et al.
62.I nt h i ss t u d y ,v e h i c l e si n i t i a l l y
approached each other in opposite lanes when the computer-
controlled vehicle unexpectedly steered toward the participant ’s
lane along a predeﬁned path. The study implemented three kinematic
variants differing in incursion “steepness": (1) a steep incursion cross-
ing in front of the participant at a sharp angle and allowing a relatively
easy escape by steering toward the opposite lane; (2) a medium
incursion at a shallower angle, heading directly toward the participant;
(3) a shallow incursion only partially entering the participant ’sl a n e ,
making it possible to ﬁnd an escape path by steering slightly toward
the shoulder (the original study used left-hand trafﬁc, so we are here
avoiding directional terms to prevent confusion).
We re-implemented reversed (i.e., right-hand trafﬁc) versions of
these three conditions in our setup (see Supplementary Fig. 2),
enabling a direct comparison between human and model behavior
under nearly identical conditions. Each of those three conditions was
repeated 64 times.
An example of our model implemented in the steep incursion
condition is shown in Fig. 4a, while Fig. 4b shows an example of the
medium incursion condition. When looking at the example simula-
tions, we can observe again that the model needs multiple re-plans
before deciding on the ﬁnal avoidance maneuver. Compared to the
front-to-rear scenario, where this is likely caused by the model ’s
bounded planning capacity, in the lateral incursion scenario, this is due
to the high uncertainty inherent in the predicted positions of the
encroaching vehicle (top panels). In Fig.4a (steep incursion), aﬁrst re-
planning is triggered at 4.2 s (ﬁrst dashed line), but this does not sig-
niﬁcantly improve the collision component of the pragmatic value. In
addition, the model only initiates minor steering maneuvers and small
accelerations/decelerations. Together, this suggests that the high
uncertainty about the other vehicle’s behavior prevents the agent from
ﬁnding an evasive policy that is better (has lower EFE) than the current
policy, instead delaying the decision, thus gaining time to see how the
situation develops. With the collision risk unresolved after theﬁrst re-
plan, surprise quickly accumulates toward a second re-plan at 4.8 s
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 6
(second dashed line). By this time, the agents are closer, allowing less
space for uncertainty to grow and enabling the model to identify a
steering policy that mitigates the collision risk (after the second re-
plan, the collision component of the pragmatic value no longer sig-
niﬁcantly contributes to surprise accumulation). The decision to
swerve toward the left is a result of both the other vehicle having
crossed sufﬁciently over to the right side to leave a gap for swerving
and the model’s stronger preference for moving into the opposite lane
over leaving the road to the right (similar to Fig.1). However, it can be
seen in Fig.4a that this trajectory is not optimal. Namely, as can be seen
in the top plot, the planned trajectory eX
ego chosen during the second
re-plan at t = 4.6 s (second dashed line) over-steers when returning to
its own lane and consequently risks leaving the road. Thus, slight
course corrections will likely be performed later (but this would occur
outside the current simulation window).
Figure 4b shows an example of the medium incursion scenario
where the model is unable to avoid a collision. Again, likely due to
uncertainty about the other vehicle ’s behavior, the ﬁrst re-plan at
t =4 . 0 s( ﬁrst dashed line) mainly results in a sharp deceleration and
minor steering towards the right (i.e., towards the shoulder). While
steering towards the right might seem suboptimal given the other
agent’s current path, it aligns with the in ﬂuence of the norm-
conditioned particle ﬁlter, which biases the model towards believing
that the other agent will likely return to its original lane. At the second
re-plan (t = 4.6 s, second dashed line), the model still focuses mostly on
continued braking. However, this only marginally improves the
Fig. 4 | Evaluation of the model in the opposite-direction lateral incursion
scenario. aA steep, unprompted incursion by the other vehicle leads to the model
swerving towards the opposite lane. The sub-panels visualize the dynamics of both
vehicles' velocityv, acceleration a, steering angle δ and (for the ego vehicle) the
components of the pragmatic value G
prag (scaled with the evidence accumulation
gain λ) that underlie the accumulated evidence towards a full policy re-plan. b In
response to a medium incursion by the other vehicle, the model attempts to avoid
collision by braking and steering left, but collides att = 5.8 s (crossed circle marker
indicates the location of the collision). c The likelihood of the ego vehicle
successfully avoiding the other vehicle by steering left (toward the opposite lane)
or right (toward the shoulder), or failing to avoid a collision. This is based on 64
model simulations and 21 to 22 human demonstrations for each of the three
incursion types. d Brake and steer response times. In panels C and D, human
behavior and response times measured in a driving simulator study
62 are shown for
reference. The whiskers here show the minimum and maximum observed values.
Video replays of the example simulations are available in the Supplementary
Information as Supplementary_Movie_3.mp4 (a) and Supplementar-
y_Movie_4.mp4 (b).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 7
collision component of the pragmatic value, leaving the imminent
collision risk unresolved. At the third re-plan at 5 s (third dashed line),
the agent keeps braking to reduce impact severity. At this point, the
vehicles, which are still on a direct collision course with nearly no
lateral offset, got so close that a collision becomes nearly unavoidable.
Consequently, even the fourth re-plan ( t = 5.4 s, fourth dashed line)
fails to ﬁnd a satisfactory trajectory and thus a collision occurs shortly
thereafter at t =5 . 8s .
We compared our model to the human data collected in the
driving simulator study by Johnson et al.
62. We closely replicated the
scenarios of that study in our simulations (see Supplementary
Information 3.2), which allowed direct comparisons between the
model and the data with respect to the chosen avoidance behavior
and both braking and swerving response times (which were extrac-
ted using the same method as in ref.62; see the “Methods” section). A
key ﬁnding of Johnson et al.
62 was that the participants ’ evasive
maneuvering patterns and collision outcomes were strongly deter-
mined by the different scenario kinematics in the three incursion
scenarios. In the steep scenario, most participants avoided collisions
by steering toward the opposite lane, while in the shallow scenario,
participants typically steered toward the shoulder, passing the other
vehicle on the “inside". However, in the medium scenario, the
majority of participants collided with the oncoming vehicle. Since
the urgency (i.e., time to collision at the initial steering of the
oncoming vehicle) was constant across scenarios, the high collision
rate in the medium case was attributed to greater uncertainty about
the other vehicle’s future path, leaving no clear escape route.
As shown in Fig. 4c, our model reproduced these results, reliably
avoiding collisions in the steep and shallow scenarios through
steering respectively left (toward the center) or right (toward the
shoulder). Interestingly, the model also reproduced the human
propensity for collision in the medium scenario. Johnson et al.
62
suggested that, conceptually, a key reason why human drivers ten-
ded to collide in the medium incursion scenario is the high perceived
uncertainty about the oncoming vehicle ’s future behavior, which
prevents the driver from ﬁnding a sufﬁciently certain escape path. As
described above, the current model offers a detailed computational
account for the possible mechanisms underlying this phenomenon:
the wide spread (uncertainty) in the behavior predictions about the
oncoming vehicle, as well as a bias towards expecting that it will
return to its own lane due to the norm-conditioning of the beliefs,
prevents the model to ﬁnd an evasive policy in time to avoid collision
(see Fig. 4b above). An additional factor behind the observed colli-
sion rates was likely also the model ’s bounded planning capacity.
Increasing the model’s planning capacity – by increasing the number
of evaluated policies in the cross entropy method tenfold – resulted
in a signiﬁcant drop in the model’s collision rate (from 82.3% to 51.6%
in the medium incursion scenario, and from 6.3% to 3.1% for shallow
incursions, for further discussion see Supplementary Information 4).
Furthermore, Johnson et al.
62 found that braking and steering
response times – measured from initiation of the incursion to the
ﬁrst reaction – were generally long, ranging from 3.5 s to 4.5 s. While
braking response times did not vary noticeably with incursion level,
steering response did decrease consistently from the steep towards
the shallow scenario. Our model generally reproduced the range of
response times, with closely matched median values (Fig.4d), but did
not capture the variation in steering response times (especially for
the shallow incursion, the model typically steered at least half a
second later). One possible explanation may be that many partici-
pants avoided collision in the steep scenario primarily by braking
before making a ﬁnal steering adjustment, delaying their recorded
steering response. In contrast, the model relied more on steering for
collision avoidance, requiring an earlier response. The underlying
reasons for these behavioral differences between the model and
human drivers are still unclear, but may have to do with varying
individual preferences for braking versus swerving. Further work is
needed to see if these individual differences can be reproduced by
the model by varying its velocity, lane change, and lateral control
effort preferences.
Intersection scenario. To test the ability of our model to generalize
to more complex scenarios and to unseen data, we evaluated it in an
intersection scenario against human data that was not used for
tuning model parameters. Speciﬁcally, we used human response data
obtained in a driving-simulator study conducted in Guelph, Canada,
by Ziraldo et al.
63 in the context of collision avoidance at intersec-
tions. This study implemented a right-turn-into-path scenario, where
the participants approached an intersection with the right of way
(green light). A computer-controlled vehicle then approached from
the right side, on an intersecting road, and performed a right turn on
red into the participant ’s lane. Right turns on red are allowed in the
US and Canada but the turning vehicle must yield; the participant ’s
vehicle therefore had the right of way. Two variations of this scenario
were implemented: In the right-turn-stopped (RS) scenario variant,
the other vehicle initially waited at the stop line in front of the
intersection and began to accelerate when the modeled agent’s time-
to-arrival was approximately 4 s. In the right-turn-not-stopped (RNS)
scenario variant, the other vehicle was moving towards the inter-
section at a constant speed and was controlled such that, under a
constant-velocity assumption, it would cross the stop line when the
modeled agent was roughly 1.5 s from entering the intersection. In
both scenarios, there was a parallel lane to the left of the modeled
agent, allowing it to steer left to avoid a collision. A detailed version
of our implementation of these scenario variants can be found
in Supplementary Information 3.3. While Ziraldo et al.
63 had each of
their 52 participant face three of those scenarios, we only consider
the ﬁrst responses (26 per scenario type), as signi ﬁcant changes in
response times and collision rates between repetitions indicated an
anticipation of the con ﬂict scenario. In total, we ran each of those
scenario variants 96 times, varying the initial velocity of the modeled
agent within the limits speci ﬁed by Ziraldo et al.
63.
In the RS scenario (Fig. 5a), after the other vehicle begins to
accelerate at t = 0.6 s ( ﬁrst dashed line), several time steps pass
before the model considers the collision risk to be signi ﬁcant (as
reﬂected in the collision penalty component of the pragmatic value).
As evidence (i.e., surprise) thereafter gradually accumulates, the
model reaches the re-planning threshold att = 3.4 s, selecting a policy
that combines braking with a leftward steering adjustment. However,
as there is still considerable uncertainty about the other vehicle ’s
future actions – particularly since the other vehicle is already vio-
lating normative expectations by not yielding, reducing the bias
introduced by norm conditioning – the inferred collision risk
decreases only slightly. This necessitates an additional re-planning
step one second later (third dashed line). Shortly afterward, the ego
vehicle passes the other vehicle, resolving the con ﬂict.
In the RNS scenario (Fig.5b), the situation becomes critical earlier,
as the other vehicle is approaching at constant speed. Since the vehicle
does not exhibit any observable braking to yield at the stop line, as
would be normatively expected, the model considers it increasingly
likely that the other vehicle will encroach into its path. As a result,
surprise accumulates based on the increasing collision likelihood. At
t =1 . 6s( ﬁrst dashed line), the ego vehicle initiates braking and applies
a slight leftward steering adjustment. However, this response is largely
insufﬁcient to reduce the collision risk (the collision component of the
pragmatic value does not change substantially). While the model
generally predicts the other agent to make a right turn, the high
uncertainty in this prediction– given the norm violations by the other
vehicle, it is mostly based on kinematic likelihood– leaves no clear safe
escape path. The reaction is also too late for braking (although it is
attempted) to prevent a collision. Additional re-planning at t =2 . 4 s
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 8
(second dashed line) likewise fails to avert the collision (t = 3.4 s). Had
the model opted for a more extreme steering maneuver at theﬁrst re-
planning point, it could have avoided the collision. However, in this
speciﬁc simulation, the added pragmatic value of such an extreme
maneuver was unclear at that point due to the high uncertainty about
the other agent ’s future trajectory. Nevertheless, as the policy sam-
pling process is stochastic, the model can occasionally opt for early
steep steering and thus avoid collisions in this scenario.
Compared the model to human responses in the same scenario,
we found that our model closely reproduced the main observations
reported in ref. 63. As in the human data, the model successfully
avoided most collisions in the RS scenario, but often collided in the
RNS scenario (Fig.5c). The slightly lower collision rate of the model in
the RNS scenario might be explained by the fact that in this scenario
approximately ten percent of human participants collided without any
noticeable reaction, which might indicate distraction effects that are
Fig. 5 | Evaluation of the model in the intersection scenario. a)R i g h t - t u r n -
stopped (RS): A vehicle initially waiting at the stop line performs a right turn on red
without yielding; by accelerating and turning into the ego vehicle’sl a n ei tf o r c e st h e
model to steer left into the parallel lane to avoid a collision. The sub-panels visualize
the dynamics of both vehicles' velocity v,a c c e l e r a t i o na, steering angle δ and (for
the ego vehicle) the components of the pragmatic value G
prag (scaled with the
evidence accumulation gainλ) which constitutes the accumulated evidence
towards a full policy re-plan. b). Right-turn-not-stopped (RNS): Another agent
approaches the intersection with a constant speed, making a right turn into the
model’s lane without yielding or even slowing down, leading to a collision att =3 . 4s
(crossed circle marker indicates the location of the collision).c) The likelihood of
the ego vehicle successfully avoiding the other vehicle (by steering to the left or
braking) or colliding with it, based on 96 model simulations and 26 human
demonstrations for each of the two scenario variants.d) Brake and steer response
times. In panels C and D, human event outcomes and response times obtained in a
driving simulator study
63 are shown for reference. The whiskers here show the
minimum and maximum observed values. Video replays of the example simulations
are available in the Supplementary Information as Supplementary_Movie_5.mp4 (a)
and Supplementary_Movie_6.mp4 (b).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 9
not represented in our model. Next to collision rate distributions, our
model reproduced the variation in human reaction times in the two
scenarios (Fig. 5d): responses in the more critical RNS scenario were
markedly faster than in the RS scenario in both human data and model
simulations. The model closely matched the timing of human
responses in both conditions, with median reaction times generally
not being apart more than 0.2 s. This is especially noteworthy, as it was
achieved in an unseen scenario without any parameter tuning. This
indicates that the model can generalize to new scenarios and can
account for human data that was not used for parameterﬁtting/tuning.
While empirically, this generalizability is limited to interactions with a
single target agent, given the strong support for the underlying model
components in the literature, it can be hypothesized that the model’s
generalizability extends further, although this has to be evaluated in
future work. Similar to the lateral incursion scenario (Fig. 4d), the
variances of the model’s reaction times are smaller compared to the
human data. However, this is most likely simply a consequence of
u s i n gas i n g l em o d e lw i t hﬁxed parameters for all simulations, thereby
ignoring potential individual differences between human participants.
Evaluating individual model mechanisms
Comparison to the empirical data (Figs. 3, 4,a n d 5) revealed that our
model captured the key aspects of human collision avoidance per-
formance in three different collision avoidance scenarios. To better
understand which of the model mechanisms are essential for capturing
the empirical observations, we evaluated the performance of seven
simpler models, which systematically excluded the key mechanisms
one-by-one (Fig. 6).
Removing evidence accumulation. Without evidence accumulation,
the model fully re-plans its policy at every time step. Consequently, it
starts reacting to changes in the other vehicle’s behavior immediately
after detecting them. This resulted in a drastic reduction in response
times across all scenarios (Fig. 6b). In addition, the model without
evidence accumulation predominantly failed to avoid collisions in the
shallow incursion scenario, contrasting sharply with human data and
the full model. This was mostly caused by the model initiating braking
very early. Given the uncertainty about the other vehicle, neither
steering left nor steering right allows safe escape paths, so the agent
Fig. 6 | Evaluation of model ablations.Comparing the full model (a) to variants of
the model that systematically exclude its key mechanisms (the columnsb–h refer
to different model ablations). We consider the front-to-rear scenario (top three
rows, see Fig.3 for the legend), the lateral incursion scenario (middle two rows, see
Fig. 4 for the legend), and the intersection scenario (bottom two rows, see Fig.5 for
the legend). In the second and third rows, dashed gray lines depict themaximum a
posteriorilinear regression of the model simulation results, with the corresponding
mean absolute errorI between that line and the ground truth (IΔ is given ins, whileIa
is given in ms−2). In the fourth and sixth row, we used the Jensen-Shannon diver-
gence DJS,a n di nt h eﬁfth and seventh row the Wasserstein distance W (in s)t o
quantify the difference between the model and empirical distributions. For all
metrics, expected values ± standard deviation are indicated.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 10
continues braking, coming to a complete stop. At the point in time
where the certainty about the other agent is low enough for safely
choosing either left or right, the agent can physically no longer avoid a
collision (as it cannot move laterally when stopped). An example
simulation of this scenario can be found in the Supplementary Infor-
mation as Supplementary_Movie_7.mp4. The fact that collisions hap-
pened mostly in the shallow incursion scenarios is likely because in the
medium and steep incursion scenarios, premature braking leaves
e n o u g hs p a c ei nf r o n to ft h ee g oa g e n tf o rt h eo t h e rv e h i c l et om o v e
across, which is not the case in the shallow incursion. In this scenario, a
collision would still occur if the ego agent stayed in its starting lateral
position, which makes braking an insuf ﬁcient avoidance mechanism.
Finally, in the intersection scenario, immediate reaction (including
both braking and steering) allowed the reduced model to avoid all RNS
collisions, in contrast to both the full model and the human data. Based
on those observations, the inclusion of evidence accumulation is cri-
tical for accounting for empirical data on human response times in all
three scenarios, evasive maneuver selection in the shallow lateral
incursion scenario, and collision rates in the intersection scenario.
Removing added noise in behavior prediction.T h em o d e lt h a tu s e s
deterministic predictions about the other vehicle produced response
times in the front-to-rear scenario that are only slightly longer than for
both the full model and the human data (Fig. 6c), especially given
shorter time gaps. By contrast, in the opposite-direction lateral
incursion and intersection scenarios, removing the noise led to sub-
stantially shorter response times. The reason for this apparent dis-
crepancy is that in the front-to-rear scenario, prediction noise results in
ego agent’s believing that the other vehicle may brake more aggres-
sively, prompting the model to react earlier. In the other scenarios,
however, removing the prediction noise decreases the ego agent ’s
uncertainty about the other vehicle, which enables it to ﬁnd a safe
escape path earlier, leading a faster response.
In the lateral incursion scenario speci ﬁcally, this leads to earlier
steering responses, which, given how these particular scenarios
unfolded, turned out be a more effective avoidance strategy, as evi-
denced by the absence of collisions in this case. However, this strategy
was only more effective after the fact (i.e., with hindsight of how the
scenario played out). In another counterfactual scenario, where the
oncoming vehicle turns back into its own lane early, swerving could
instead result in a collision (see ref. 62 for a discussion of this impor-
tant point). Prediction noise affected not only response times but also
the model’s choice of evasive maneuver in the lateral incursion sce-
nario. In particular, the model with deterministic predictions pre-
dominantly opted to avoid the other vehicle by steering left regardless
of the incursion proﬁle. This allowed the model to avoid collisions in all
simulations, but is not consistent with the human data.
Similarly, in the intersection scenario, this model ablation suc-
cessfully avoided all collisions as well. Taken together, these ﬁndings
underscore that behavior prediction noise is crucial for accurately
reproducing human behavior, particularly in the lateral incursion and
intersection scenarios. Speciﬁcally, uncertainty in the predictions of
the other vehicle’s actions seems to be a key explanation for why most
human drivers ended up in a collision in the medium lateral incursion
scenario and the RNS intersection scenario (as discussed above in
relation to Figs. 4b, 5b, respectively).
Removing pedal constraints. The model not constrained by pedal
switching delays resulted in approximately 0.2 s faster brake response
times in all three scenarios compared to the full model (Fig. 6d). This
matches the delay of 0.2 s implemented to represent the switch of the
driver’s foot from the gas pedal to the brake pedal. Although the effect
appears simple and straightforward, the implemented pedal con-
straints are essential for capturing the differences between steering
and braking response times observed in human behavior. For example,
in the lateral incursion scenario, our model still slightly overestimates
steering response times while underestimating braking response
times, a discrepancy that could not be corrected by adjusting the
surprise threshold for re-planning, as this would shift all response
times uniformly.
Removing looming perception. We analyzed a version of the model
which directly perceived kinematic variables without relying on
looming (Fig. 6e) as well as one which perceived looming but did not
have a looming perception threshold (Fig. 6f). In the front-to-rear
scenario, both these models differed from the full model and the
human data in that they produced faster brake response times at
longer time gaps. For the model without the looming threshold, this is
due to the fact that greater time gaps (and therefore greater distances)
require a larger velocity difference to surpass the looming detection
threshold, which delays responses, as it needs more time to accumu-
late. Furthermore, these results being very similar to the model that
did not perceive looming at all (Fig.6e) indicates that in this scenario,
the looming threshold was a key factor behind the ability of the model
to capture human response times. In addition, while not speci ﬁcally
analyzed here, this effect is expected to be exacerbated in high-speed
freeway scenarios where (given the higher speed) the following dis-
tances for a given time gap increase, further emphasizing the impor-
tance that the model accounts for this phenomenon. In the other two
scenarios, removing the looming threshold (or looming perception
entirely) did not have any major effects, as the relevant observations in
those scenarios are based on lateral movements.
In summary, models without either looming perception or
looming threshold resulted in qualitative differences between the
model and human data on brake response times in the front-to-rear
scenario. In addition to the strong theoretical support, this highlights
the importance of both looming-based perception and looming per-
ception threshold for scenarios with largely longitudinal dynamics.
Removing the norm-conditioned particle ﬁlter.W i t h o u tt h en o r m -
conditioned particle ﬁlter, the model behavior in the front-to-rear
scenario changes only slightly compared to the full model (Fig. 6g),
showing marginally longer response times. In the lateral incursion
scenario, however, the effect is more pronounced, with collisions
being less likely in the medium incursion (avoided by leftward steer-
ing) and more likely in the shallow incursion. Relative to the full model,
this ablation lacks the bias against predicting steeper incursions ear-
lier, which incentivizes steering towards the left. This yields a small
advantage in the medium incursion scenario, where avoiding towards
the other vehicles lane is typically effective, but increases collision risk
in the shallow incursion, where both the full model and humans con-
sider rightward avoidance the better option. In addition, the ablated
model also shows slightly longer reaction times in the lateral incursion
scenario. This again follows from the lack of norm conditioning, as
without it, the model often predicts that the other vehicle will leave the
road before posing a collision risk, whereas the full model– biased by
the normative ﬁlter – believes the other vehicle will stay in its lane.
Consequently, in this ablation, with the predicted collision likelihood
being lower, surprise accumulates more slowly, and the re-planning
threshold is reached later, leading to a slower reaction. In the inter-
section scenario, removing the norm-conditioned particleﬁlter leads
to both faster reaction times and a successful resolution of the conﬂict
in nearly every instance. This is logical, as the expectation that the
other vehicle would stop to yield resulted in a delayed reaction.
Without this bias, potential colli sions are taken more seriously and
reacted to earlier.
While these differences already highlight the importance of the
norm-conditioned particleﬁlter, it has the strongest impact in benign
(non-conﬂict) scenarios. In such scenarios, the model with the simple
kinematics-based behavior prediction mechanism is unrealistically
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 11
conservative due to having to plan for all kinematically possible futures
of the other vehicle — a problem that is avoided by the model with
norm-conditioned particleﬁlter (see Supplementary Information 5 for
an example).
Removing the epistemic component of EFE. Lastly, we investigated a
model variant that ignored the epistemic value when selecting poli-
cies. This ablation, with the exception of the reaction times in the
front-to-rear scenario, did not result in any signi ﬁcant differences in
the model behavior, both in the actual outcome and the derived
goodness-of-ﬁt metrics. Consequently, it can be argued that the EFE
part of our model could potentially be reduced to pragmatic value
alone, which would make the model conceptually similar to a belief-
space model predictive control
70. Nevertheless, the epistemic value
does play a role in scenarios where, for instance, observability is
limited; there, epistemic value has a substantial effect on model
behavior (Supplementary Information 6). This complements the
previous investigations of the role of epistemic value in scenarios
requiring visual behavior
35. For these reasons, we treat the version of
the model with epistemic value as the “full” model here to allow for
generalization to similar scenarios in the future.
In addition, in the lateral incursion scenario, we examined the
impact of our model ’s bounded reasoning capacity. Speci ﬁcally, as
noted above, increasing the number of policies evaluated during
replanning led to a substantial reduction in observed collision rates-
ranging from roughly one-third to one-half across scenarios. This
suggests that bounded reasoning is a crucial component for accurately
modeling human collision-avoidance failures. However, since not all
collisions were avoided, other factors (namely, prediction uncertainty
and the expectation of norm-compliant behavior) also play a sig-
niﬁcant role in driving such outcomes.
Overall, the seven ablated model variants analyzed above show
qualitative differences compared to the full model, and none repro-
duce human behavior across all three scenarios as well as the full
model. This provides further evidence for the importance of all the
analyzed model mechanisms in regard to capturing human collision
avoidance behavior.
Discussion
Building on previous work 35, we here presented an active inference-
based framework for modeling human collision avoidance behavior
based on ﬁrst principles. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst published
computational model that offers a detailed account of human collision
avoidance behavior across multiple con ﬂict scenarios. Our model
reproduces many key results in the rich literature on collision avoid-
ance in front-to-rear scenarios, in particular the dependence of
response times and braking magnitude on scenario kinematics. The
model also generated several detailed predictions on how evasive
maneuver decisions (braking vs. swerving) vary with scenario kine-
matics, which can be tested in future experiments. Furthermore, we
compared the model to detailed human behavior data in an opposite-
direction lateral incursion scenario with varying kinematics
62 and an
intersection scenario with a right-turning vehicle failing to yield the
right of way
63, both obtained in driving simulator studies. This analysis
demonstrated that the model can reproduce human evasive maneuver
decisions, collision outcomes, as well as response times in different
variations of these two scenarios. The model also shows strong gen-
eralization across scenarios, with the model tuned solely on the front-
to-rear and lateral incursion scenario making accurate predictions of
human responses in the intersection scenario.
A key feature of our proposed model is its ability to ﬂexibly
represent closed-loop collision avoidance through dynamic re-
planning of policies, including braking, steering, and accelerating
actions, in a way that is qualitatively and quantitatively similar to
human collision avoidance behavior. In contrast, existing publicly
available collision avoidance models either implement a “one-shot",
often predetermined, open-loop evasive maneuver
1,5,71 or limited
aspects of closed-loop control, such as intermittent braking but no
steering
11,72. Some commercially available models – the Stochastic
Cognitive Model (SCM) from BMW73,74 and the driveBOT model from
cogniBIT75,76 – reportedly implement human-like closed-loop behavior
in collision avoidance scenarios. However, although the SCM is openly
available, the published evaluations provide only a limited basis for
meaningful comparison. For instance, Fries et al.
74 evaluate SCM on
only a few collision-avoidance cases and compare mainly velocity-
over-time proﬁles, without a systematic analysis of diverse metrics
across scenario variations. For driveBOT, the evaluations are more
comprehensive
75,76, but the lack of available information on the
detailed working principles of the model precludes a meaningful
comparison with our work.
Our model achieves closed-loop behavior by continuously evalu-
ating evasive policies based on their expected free energy, pursuing
the policy with the lowest EFE, and allowing for further re-planning if
the chosen policy turns out to not yield the preferred (and hence
expected) outcomes (e.g., due to limited planning accuracy or unex-
pected changes in how the scenario unfolds). This, in effect, imple-
ments a constraint satisfaction mechanism where different model
preferences are traded against each other inﬁnding the policy with the
highest overall combined pragmatic value and epistemic value. We
observed several examples of this (Fig. 3) where, for example, the
model generally prefers to brake at low speeds (since the loss related
to the preferred speed is not as high as the cost of changing lane) and
swerve at higher speeds (where the cost of braking in terms of speed
loss are higher). This yields detailed predictions of human behaviors in
different kinematic situations that could be further tested empirically.
Another important aspect of our model is its ability to dynamically
account for uncertainty about the future behavior of other agents. This
is particularly important in situations like the lateral incursion scenario
and the intersection scenario. For instance, in the former, the driver
cannot determine a priori if the other vehicle will continue crossing the
ego vehicle’s lane or if it will turn back to its original lane, resulting in a
wide range of potential future trajectories of the other vehicle. How-
ever, the uncertainty may be reduced as the scenario unfolds, opening
up new available escape paths, orescape affordances
62,a sw a st h ec a s e
in the current steep and shallow incursion scenarios. In such cases, an
evasive response that is initiated too early may be premature (and non-
optimal) and does not properly re ﬂect human behavior. We saw an
example of this in Fig. 6c, where in both the lateral incursion and
intersection scenario, the model without prediction noise responded
much faster than humans and the full model, thus avoiding collision in
all cases. However, such overconﬁdent evasive maneuvering behavior
could be detrimental in other scenarios, for instance, if in our lateral
incursion scenario, the other vehicle would turn back into its original
lane. By representing the uncertainty about the other vehicle’sf u t u r e
positions using a vehicle dynamics (bicycle) model and a noisy particle
ﬁlter, our model is able to handle such situations and successfully
reproduce human behavior.
Furthermore, in particular the intersection scenario showed that it
is also important that such noisy predictions are biased towards norm-
compliant behavior (Fig. 6g). Speciﬁcally, without the prior expecta-
tion that other vehicle will follow established rules and norms such as
yielding the right of way, the model will predict potential collision
scenarios earlier, react faster and resolve the conﬂict safely. However,
in many situations, this leads to overreactive non-human like collision
avoidance behavior. We also demonstrated that thenorm-conditioned
particle ﬁlter is necessary to avoid overly conservative (and therefore
non-human like) behavior in non-con ﬂict driving scenarios (Supple-
mentary Information 5).
In the collision avoidance scenarios simulated in the present
study, there is little opportunity for the driver to reduce the
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 12
uncertainty about the oncoming vehicle ’s future trajectory through
epistemic actions. In other words, there is little the driver can do to
obtain further information that could help predict what the other
vehicle will do. Thus, as expected, disabling the epistemic value com-
ponent of the EFE did not signi ﬁcantly change the model behavior.
However, as shown in Supplementary Information 6 and previous
work
35, the epistemic value component in our model does drive policy
s e l e c t i o ni nt r a fﬁc scenarios with epistemic affordances, that is,
situations with opportunities for actions yielding information that may
resolve uncertainty. Hence, even if the epistemic value did not have
any signiﬁcant effect on policy selection in the present study, it should
still be considered a key aspect of human road user behavior. In par-
ticular, in the real world, communicative acts such as honking,ﬂashing
headlights, or initially moving to the right in the lane could reduce
uncertainty about the other vehicle driver’s intent. Since other agents
were here assumed to be non-reactive, such aspects were not
addressed in the current work; this is a topic for future development of
the model.
While active inference models can be implemented computa-
tionally in many different ways, we used a stochastic receding-
horizon control architecture as the basis for the implementation,
following
35. This shares similarities with prior work in robotics,
particularly decision-theoretic approaches that explicitly account
for uncertainty in actuation and sensing by propagating belief states
into the future, often using particle-based representations, and then
selecting actions that optimize expected outcomes based on this
projected belief evolution
77–79. However, our work diverges from
these engineering models in two crucial aspects. First, since our goal
is to represent human driver behavior rather than designing a robot/
vehicle controller, the modeling focuses on capturing key aspects of
human driving, such as response timing and evasive maneuver
decision making, rather than optimizing performance based on
engineering criteria. Second, our modeled agent minimizes EFE (as
prescribed by the active inference framework), while traditional
state-based reward functions often employed in the control litera-
ture lack such a theoretically-grounded objective derived from ﬁrst
principles.
Our model incorporates an explicit mechanism for evidence
accumulation to account for human response timing, based on exist-
ing models
6,43,80–82. Evidence accumulation models naturally account
for the situation-dependency of response timing in traf ﬁcs i t u a t i o n s :
the faster a trafﬁcc o nﬂict escalates, the faster the human’sr e s p o n s et o
it refs. 6,14,81. Compared to existing evidence accumulation models,
our model introduces some key novel aspects. In particular, in contrast
to traditional models that accumulate perceptual evidence (e.g.,
looming
43), our model rather accumulates surprise. Similar ideas have
been explored in existing models 3,6,51,72, based on the notion that a
trafﬁcc o nﬂict by deﬁnition is an extremely rare (and hence surprising)
event which always takes place against a“default" expectation of how
the situation would normally play out (Fig.1). This is also the key idea
behind the NIEON (Non-Impaired driver with their Eyes ON the con-
ﬂict) response time model which conceptualizes the onset of the sti-
mulus that human drivers respond to in a trafﬁcc o nﬂict as the onset of
surprise (i.e., the violation of the initial default expectation)
6.T h e
current model generalizes this idea in several ways. First, instead of
triggering a prede ﬁned action, such as braking when the surprising
evidence has reached the threshold, the evidence accumulation here
triggers the re-planning of a new policy, using the EFE-based policy
selection mechanism discussed above. Second, the surprise signal that
is being accumulated is not just the difference between a predicted
and actual signal but rather the negative pragmatic value of the current
policy, that is, how “bad" the currently selected default policy is rela-
tive to the agent ’s preferred observations. This provides a straight-
forward solution to the known problem of how to determine whether a
given surprise signal is relevant to the agent
51.
Importantly, our model accumulates surprise deterministically
without accumulation noise. Under this assumption, the accumulation
rate can be expressed in units of the decision boundary (another key
parameter traditionally important in the evidence accumulation lit-
erature, interpreted as response caution), and hence we did not need
to de ﬁne a separate decision boundary
83. Nevertheless, adding such
accumulation noise could be seen as a future improvement of our
model if we want to better match the high variance observed in human
reaction times (Figs. 4d, 5d). Similarly, the addition of surprise decay
could also be considered.
While we here model evidence accumulation explicitly, it can in
principle be seen as an implicit feature of active inference
84. However,
in practice, it is challenging to accurately represent human response
dynamics implicitly in a simpli ﬁed model like ours. To enable
straightforward tuning of the model ’s response performance to
human data, we chose the current explicit modeling of evidence
accumulation. As demonstrated by our simulation results (Fig.6b), the
inclusion of this mechanism is essential to account for realistic
response times in our model.
The current model is based on the general model predictive
control architecture originally developed for the model of routine
driving described in ref. 35 which, in turn, is based on the standard
discrete-time active inference EFE model for planning agents for-
mulated as a partially observable Markov decision process
25.T h eo r i -
ginal routine driving model in ref. 35 focused primarily on the role of
epistemic value in resolving uncertainty when driving around visual
occlusions and during visual time sharing (drawing from the rat-in-a-T-
maze example in ref. 25). However, that model was not aimed at
describing time-critical behaviors. For instance, in collision avoidance
scenarios its responses to sudden stimuli would be overly fast, similar
to the version of our model without evidence accumulation (Fig. 6b).
Extending the original model
35 with not only evidence accumulation,
but also other mechanisms such as looming-based perception and
norm-conditioned predictions was essential for capturing human col-
lision avoidance behavior (Fig. 6). Otherwise, the model we reported
here retains the key features of the original routine driving model
needed for dealing with uncertainty resolution through epistemic
action, thus offering a powerful and general computational framework
for modeling driving behavior, also beyond collision avoidance. As in
ref. 35, we employed engineering tools like the cross-entropy method
and particle ﬁlters with discrete and continuous variables. However,
while relying on such established methods, our model does not reduce
to a combination of them; instead, these methods serve as means for
implementing speciﬁc cognitive mechanisms within our active infer-
ence framework.
Our framework is grounded not only in active inference and the
free energy principle
27, but also enactivist approaches to cognitive
science85,86. Active inference and enactivist cognitive science share the
foundational notion that behavior in biological agents results from a
self-organizing process geared towards sustaining the agent’si n t e g r i t y
(existence) over time. This emphasizes a strong continuity between life
and mind
86,87 and offers a natural solution to the problem how the
certain aspects of the environment become meaningful and relevant to
an agent
88. Such an existential imperative can be described as the
organism striving to maintain itself in a sparse attractive set of pre-
ferred agent-environment states, where the attractive set depends on
the speciﬁc organism in question. Thus, to survive over time, a ﬁsh
needs to remain in water with the right chemical balance and tem-
perature range, obtain food, avoid being eaten by certain predators
etc. This implies that these particular states are meaningful and rele-
vant to the ﬁsh, which then acts in order to observe these states with a
high degree of certainty, thus looking as if it is minimizing free energy
over time. By the same token, we endowed our model with a (highly
simpliﬁed) set of preferred states that are meaningful and relevant to a
human car driver (avoid danger of collision, stay on the road, keep up
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 13
progress, avoid too harsh braking/steering) and de ﬁned the model
such that it acts (selects and executes policies) in a way that maximizes
the chance of observing these preferred states.
Related to this, our model also offers an operationalization of the
classical notion ofaffordance, traditionally broadly deﬁned by Gibson
37
as what the environment “offers the animal, what it provides or fur-
nishes, either for good or ill” (p. 127). Thus, when our model identiﬁes
candidate evasive policies associated with low EFE, these can be
understood as affordances in the sense of opportunities for actions
that are worth pursuing. The active inference framework offers a fur-
ther distinction betweenpragmatic affordancesyielding unsurprising,
familiar and preferred observations andepistemic affordancesyielding
information that can resolve uncertainty about pragmatic
affordances
35,89,90 (see ref. 62) for a further discussion about this
expanded notion of affordances and its relation to the classical affor-
dance concept in ecological psychology).
Thanks to the generality of active inference, models based on it
have been developed for virtually every facet of biologically-based
cognition and behavior, in organisms ranging from single cells
87,
plants91, individual animals and humans 92 to social and cultural
phenomena93, which provides a great source of concepts and ideas for
modeling different aspects of human road user behavior. Thus,
importantly, we see active inference not just as a computational
approach to model development, but as a general theoretical frame-
work for understanding road user behavior that can guide modeling
at a conceptual level and generate hypotheses for experimental
studies. At the same time, the great majority of existing active
inference models use relatively simple toy scenarios, thereby limiting
its applicability to real-world human behavior. By operationalizing
active inference in the context of a dynamically rich task, that is,
collision avoidance and evaluating it against human data from both
simulated and real-world driving, this study pushes the boundaries of
active inference applications toward the modeling of complex human
naturalistic behaviors.
While, as discussed above, our model represents a signi ﬁcant
advancement in human collision avoidance modeling, it has several
limitations that can be addressed in future work. First, in this work, we
essentially hand-tuned the model parameters to ﬁt the human data
from the two collision avoidance scenarios. Whereas this highlights the
model’s generalizability and interpretability, especially considering its
good performance on the third (intersection) scenario not used for
tuning, such an approach is impractical at scale. Future research
should explore systematic parameter optimization methods, for
example, using the approach suggested by Wei et al.
94.
Second, the current model assumes that other agents are non-
reactive (i.e., in the generative model’s state transition function, other
agents’ states are independent from each other and the ego agent).
This assumption, therefore, limits the model to scenarios where
interactions are only weakly linked and is unlikely to hold in the general
case. For example, norms about priority – such as at an unsignalized
intersection – are generally interactive, with one agent ’s norm com-
pliance depending on the other agents ’ behavior. Thus, future work
should extend the model to include reactive agents by implementing
interactive norms and communicative or epistemic actions that allow
agents to probe or signal intentions. Such extensions would
strengthen the model’s applicability and allow simulations of multi-
agent interactions under active inference. Moreover, the current
model (as well as the original routine driving model in ref. 35)o n l y
reasons at a shallow “unsophisticated" level about how actions bring
about future observations with varying degrees of uncertainty. Further
work could explore the possibilities of incorporating sophisticated
inference
95, which enables“deeper" levels of recursive reasoning about
how future observations would lead to updated beliefs and corre-
sponding new actions. This may be particularly relevant when mod-
eling interactions between road users.
Third, the model currently only accounts for perceptual limita-
tions in terms of visual angle and looming. However, looming only
represents the relative motion of objects moving longitudinally
towards the observer and, strictly speaking, only applies to objects
located along a straight path of travel relative to the gaze direction of
the observer (in our case, this means objects located straight ahead of
the ego vehicle). Thus, additional perceptual variables are needed to
represent perceptual thresholds on the detection of perpendicular
motion (e.g., a pedestrian moving into the street ahead) or repre-
senting relative motion of objects that are otherwise perpendicular
from the observer’s gaze and heading direction. In addition, the per-
ceptual effects of environmental and stimulus-related factors such as
weather (e.g., reduced visibility due to fog, heavy rain or snow),
lighting conditions (daylight, dusk, night, effects of headlights, etc.),
glare, and stimulus conspicuity would ideally need to be accounted
for. Another way in which the model ’s perceptual ﬁdelity could be
improved is by explicitly modeling the human ﬁeld of view, including
the different functional properties of foveal versus peripheral vision,
which can be combined with the visual behavior model outlined in the
original model
35.
Beyond perceptual limitations, the use of more realistic percep-
tual variables such as the optically speci ﬁed longitudinal time-to-
collision ( τ in36), bearing angle (specifying perpendicular collision
course96), and global optic ﬂow rate or edge rate (specifying self
motion relative to the ground 97,98) could be further explored. This
would allow for de ﬁning observation and state spaces in the model,
which are more aligned with the ecological information available to
human drivers.
Fourth, while mechanisms for dealing with partial observability
during occlusions and visual time sharing were explored in ref. 35,
further work is needed to develop more comprehensive solutions for
representing and reasoning about multiple agents hidden behind
occluding objects or appearing outside the driver’s ﬁeld of view (see
also Wei et al.
99); this could help translate the model to more complex
and crowded conﬂict scenarios.
Fifth, the model’s generalizability beyond the presented scenarios
from the Anglo-American cultural context has not been evaluated.
Three types of assumptions are especially noteworthy: (1) the low-level
control assumption that drivers use the same foot for acceleration and
braking, (2) the higher-level assumptions about other peoples beha-
vior encoded in normative likelihoods (for example, the different rules
regarding right turns on red light in North America and Europe), and
(3) the own preferences de ﬁning acceptable behavior (such as
infringing on other agents’ lanes). As those assumptions are subject to
cultural in ﬂuences
100,101, they may not transfer seamlessly to other
regions of the world. A future model could be made more robust by
making such assumptions explicit and learnable (e.g., by modeling
them as additional latent (belief) states or context variables dependent
on a country).
Finally, while the current policy sampling and kinematic-based
particleﬁlter approach were demonstrated to work well in the current
scenarios, this could be a limiting factor in scaling the model to a wider
range of scenarios, especially when modeling pre-con ﬂict scenarios
with more complex road infrastructures and road user interactions. To
overcome this limitation, machine-learning-based data-driven
models
102–106 could be leveraged to generate possible futures in our
generative model’s state transition function, either stand-alone or in
combination with the current kinematics-based predictions, thus
potentially further enhancing the generalizability of the model. In
principle, such data-driven models, if employed in a closed-loop
manner, could potentially serve as an alternative to our proposed
active inference model in its entirety, given their clear advantages in
inference time – no expensive policy selection process is needed– as
well as their superior ability to learn from large human datasets in
complex geometric environments. These characteristics, after all,
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 14
allowed those models to show remarkable and increasing accuracy in
the prediction of routine driving behavior 107. However, research on
evaluating such models in collision avoidance scenarios is lacking. To
understand their current capabilities, we tested one of the state-of-the-
art machine-learned models (ADAPT
22) in the lateral-incursion scenario
(Supplementary Information 7). We found that the data-driven model
did not capture human behavior well, likely due to simplistic learning
objectives and under-representation of critical scenarios in the train-
ing data. Furthermore, the black-box nature of such models restricts
them to an exclusively descriptive/predictive role, without providing
insight into the underlying cognitive mechanisms driving human
behavior.
Overall, our work contributes to the recent body of
research
35,94,99,108 with new evidence that active inference can serve as a
general framework for computational road user modeling. Along with
the emerging real-world applications of active inference in robotics109
and artiﬁcial intelligence110, this work can aid in the development of
agents used for the simulation-based evaluation of advanced driver
assistance systems and automated vehicles
4,111,112.
Methods
Model principles
Our model follows the architecture of the original model initially for-
mulated by Engström et al.35, and combines some of the original ele-
ments of that model with multiple new mechanisms. In particular, our
model retains the representation of probabilistic beliefs using sets of
samples and the correspondingly sample-based estimation of the
expected free energy (see equation ( 8)) as well as the cross-entropy
method used for policy selection. In addition to these mechanisms, we
introduced looming perception, evidence accumulation, the norm-
conditioned particleﬁlter, and the constraints on acceleration proﬁles
(see Fig. 6 for the analysis of the impact of these new mechanisms on
model behavior). We also modiﬁed the Bayesian belief update (equa-
tion (2)) and the calculation of the epistemic value (equation (9)).
In our active inference model, the environment is represented by
the generative process, with a state of the worldη 2 E which is partially
observable by the agent. The agent can inﬂuence the environment with
its actions a 2 A (according to the state transition probability
bpðη
0jη, aÞ), resulting in observationso 2 O, whose dependence on the
world state is described inbpðojηÞ (the bp is used to show these function
be part of the generative process).
The agent has an internal model of the world, the generative
model, with the corresponding partially observable states 2 S,a n dt h e
corresponding state transition function pðs0js, aÞ and observation
probabilityp(o∣s). As the generative modelis an abstraction of the real
world described by the generative process, η and s do not necessarily
have to represent the same state spaces (E≠S). The agent is uncertain
about the state of the generative model, represented by the probability
density functionq(s) (referred to as the agent’s belief about the states).
Following35, in our model, the agent represents its belief distributions
q(s) in a non-parametric way as a set of N samples S ={ s1, …, sN}( i . e . ,a
particle ﬁlter).
The agent then tries to minimize its free energy, both in the belief
q(s) it forms ( variational free energy )a n dt h ea c t i o n sa it chooses
(expected free energy). The action and policy selection is based on the
existence of a preference priorp(o) depicting preferred observations.
Perception
At time t, the agent perceives the world state ηt,r e s u l t i n gi nt h e
observationot:
ot /C24bpðo0jηt Þð 1Þ
With this observation, the agent updates its old belief q(st−1)t o q(st).
The active inference framework postulates that this update is based on
the minimization of thevariational free energy25, but in our case, we use
standard Bayesian updating:
qðst Þ/ pðot jst Þ Eqðst/C01 Þpðst jst/C01, at/C01Þ : ð2Þ
Here, the particle ﬁlter ﬁrst advances the individual samples in St−1
(representingq(st−1)) using the transition function to get the expected
states SA,t (approximatingqAðst Þ =e x p Eqðst/C01 Þlnpðst jst/C01, at/C01Þ
/C16/C17
), with
sA, t, n /C24pðs0jst/C01, n, at/C01Þ being randomly sampled. Then, a kernel den-
sity estimate113,114 based on SA,t is used to approximate qA(st)a sa
Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM). Assuming that p(ot∣st)i sG a u s s i a na s
well, q(st) can also be represented as a GMM; this allows straightfor-
ward sampling ofSt. Compared to the approach in the original model35
of weighting samples sA,t,n ∈ SA,t with p(ot∣sA,t,n) and then resampling
based thereon, this approach allowed us to represent large shifts in
beliefs outside the extreme values of the initial set S
0.
The agent’s visual perception in our model is based on looming
(lementary Information 2.2) – the optical information immediately
available to humans about the relative motion of objects straight
ahead in the direction of travel37.S p e c iﬁcally, the relative position and
motion of objects along the forward path of the agent is perceived in
terms of the visual angleφ subtended by the object at the retina of the
observer, and its derivative, the angular rate _φ (looming)
36,42.D u et o
the nonlinear relationship between the observer ’sd i s t a n c et ot h e
observed vehicle (in Fig. 2a referred to as Δx)a n d φ (with increasing
distances, equal variations δΔx lead to increasingly smaller δφ), per-
ception errors for φ and _φ will lead, respectively, to increasing infer-
ence errors and therefore uncertainty about the position and speed of
the leading other vehicle at increasing distances. We represent this
aspect in the model by setting the noise inp(o∣s) to be constant across
φ and its derivatives.
At a certain distance, _φ is no longer perceptible to the human eye,
which implies a minimal threshold for looming detection
44,45.T o
account for this, the model incorporates a detection threshold on _φ
(i.e., for smallj _φ j, the means of the observation probabilitiesp(o∣s)f o r
velocities and acceleration were set to the values corresponding to
_φ = 0). This means that changes in the other vehicle’s velocity cannot
be perceived by a human driver beyond a certain distance, resulting,
for example, in a delayed recognition if the lead vehicle suddenly
brakes.
Behavior prediction
After observing the current state of the world, the agent applies the
state transition functionpðs
0js, aÞ starting from its current beliefq(st)i n
o r d e rt og e n e r a t eap r e d i c t e db e l i e fa b o u tt h ef u t u r es t a t e so ft h e
situation eq
s ðsτjπ t , qðst ÞÞ (with τ ∈ {t +1 , …, t + H}, an arbitrary policy π
containing the ego agent’s sequence of planned actions, and predic-
tion horizon H) of all the agents in the scene, as well as the corre-
sponding belief over possible future observations
eqoðoτjπt , qðst ÞÞ = Eeqs ðsτjπt , qðst ÞÞpðoτjsτÞ. During this prediction process,
the agent adds noise to the control inputs of the other agents to
represent the possibility that they might change their behavior.
Practically, the agent advances the belief eqs ðsτjπ t , qðst ÞÞ (repre-
sented by eSτ = fsτ,1 , ... , sτ, N g) to the next time step by using the state
transition function (in our case based on a bicycle model 115,s e eS u p -
plementary Information 2.1) on each of the sample states sτ,n ~ p(sτ∣sτ
−1,n, aτ−1) (similarly to forming the expected belief qA(s)i nt h eb e l i e f
update). The belief eqoðoτjπ t , qðst ÞÞ is then represented by the set
eOτ = foτ,1 , ... , oτ, N g,w h e r eoτ,n ~ p(oτ∣sτ,n).
This belief propagation scheme representsunsophisticated infer-
ence in the technical sense that it does not condition the beliefs about
future states on corresponding counterfactual observations. While it
would theoretically be possible to use a form of sophisticated
inference95 that accounts for such conditioning, we here used the
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 15
unsophisticated approach for simplicity, similar to the original model35
and most existing active inference models.
Importantly, our state transition function pðs0js, aÞ function is
composed out of two parts, with
pðs0js, aÞ/ pnðs0Þ/C21poðs0js, aÞ : ð3Þ
Here, poðs0js, aÞ is the standard kinematic likelihood function (as used
in ref. 35), while the projected normative probability /C21pnðs0Þ biases the
agent to predict future states which currently, and over the near
future, are aligned with the norm-compliant behavior of other vehicles.
This represents the human tendency to avoid overly pessimistic
predictions about the behavior of other trafﬁc participants by instead
assuming that they will adhere to road rules and other established
trafﬁcn o r m s
47,48; for example, assuming that oncoming vehicles will
stay in their lane or yield the right of way, without evidence to the
contrary, is necessary for ﬂuent driving.
In practice, we deﬁne /C21p
n with
/C21pnðsτÞ/ minfpnðsτÞ,2
pnð/C21sτ+1 Þ pnð/C21sτ + Hn
Þ
pnð/C21sτ +1 Þ + pnð/C21sτ+ Hn
Þgð 4Þ
applying the normative probabilitypn to the current time as well as
short- and medium-term predictions/C21s (Hn is setting the medium-term
prediction horizon) to evaluate their norm compliance. This ensures
that the model’s predictions are not only biased against actions which
lead to immediate norm violations, but also against those that put the
other vehicle into a position where norm compliance becomes
kinematically less likely over time (e.g., initiating a turn while in a
straight lane does not immediately lead to the vehicle leaving the road,
but might put the vehicle in a position where staying on the road
becomes kinematically impossible). Crucially, the use of the current
norm-compliance as an upper bound ensures that once norm-violating
behavior is observed, the model no longer places trust into norms as a
way of constraining predictions about other agents ’ behavior. In
collision avoidance scenarios initiated by the unexpected, norm-
violating behavior of other agents, this allows the model to account for
all kinematically possible but low-probability “extreme” (long-tail)
behaviors.
This approach – which we call norm-conditioned particle ﬁlter –
helps aligning the model’s predictions with realistic driving scenarios
while accounting for norm violations when necessary. Even though the
norms relevant for our studied scenarios (lane following, yielding the
right of way) could in general be implemented globally based on map
information (for example a detailed graph), for simplicity and com-
putational efﬁciency we chose to implement in each scenario only
those norms that are relevant to that scenario (Supplementary Infor-
mation 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3; see also Supplementary Information 2.1 for
details on sampling from pðs
0js, aÞ).
Policy sampling
Based on the predicted behavior of the other vehicle, the agent selects
its policyπ. Here, policies are deﬁned as sequences ofH future actions;
following the bicycle model, the actions are de ﬁned in terms of
accelerationalong and steering rateω . These actions are selected using
the cross-entropy method35,52, which iteratively resamples sets of M
candidate policies K times, where the resampling focuses around the
subset of theβM best samples from the previous iteration. Speciﬁcally,
the agent takes the mean and variance of this promising subset
(ignoring potential correlations), and then samples a new set with size
M from the corresponding normal distribution. In contrast to the ori-
ginal model
35 that randomly picked theﬁnal sampling output from the
last iteration’ss e t ,h e r ew es p e c iﬁcally choose the best sample.
To better represent human behavior, the model incorporates a
pedal constraint to ﬁlter out unrealistic changes in acceleration
(Supplementary Information 2.3). As human drivers generally control
acceleration by operating the brake and gas pedal with a single foot
and cannot move the foot between pedals instantaneously, the model
imposes a constant holding time interval of 0.2 s ata
0 ≲ 0m s−2 (similar
to116), such that if the model transitions from a current acceleration
along > a0 to a target accelerationalong,f < a0,i tm u s tﬁrst decelerate to
a0, maintain that value for 0.2 s, and then proceed toalong,f. The same
applies for acceleration changes in the other direction.
Policy roll-out and evaluation
To evaluate a policyπ, the agentﬁrst uses the bicycle model to roll out
its possible future states based on π. In the general case, the possible
future states of the agent and the other vehicle are coupled, hence the
agent rolls out its policies jointly with the predicted futures of the
other vehicle. For the reason of simplicity, however, our model
assumes that in pðs
0js, aÞ the other vehicle is unresponsive to the
actions of the ego vehicle, allowing us to separate behavior prediction
and policy roll-outs.
Active inference then rests on the fundamental assumption that
an agent prefers policies which minimize its expected free energy (EFE)
G over the prediction horizon ofH time steps; in other words, the best
policy is the one with the lowest EFE. This EFE combines the desire of
the agent to, on the one hand, observe itself in states that it prefers
(maximize pragmatic value g
pragm) and, on the other hand, seek
information that may reduce uncertainty about the world (maximize
epistemic value g
epist):
Gðπ t , qðst ÞÞ = Pt + H
τ= t +1
/C0 gpragm eqoðoτjπ t , qðst ÞÞ
/C0/C1
/C0 gepist eqs ðsτjπ t , qðst ÞÞ
/C0/C1
:
ð5Þ
The pragmatic values gpragm is deﬁned as
gpragm eqoðoÞ
/C0/C1
= Eeqo ðoÞlnpðoÞ , ð6Þ
while we use the Shannon entropyH to calculate the epistemic value25
gepist eqs ðsÞ
/C0/C1
= Eeqo ðoÞDKL eqðsjoÞjeqs ðsÞ
/C2/C3
= HðEeqs ðsÞpðojsÞÞ /C0Eeqs ðsÞHðpðojsÞÞ : ð7Þ
The ﬁrst term in Equation ( 7)i sk n o w na st h e posterior predictive
entropyand represents the extent to which a policy is expected to yield
a variety of different observations. The second term, known as
expected ambiguity,represents the diversity of observations expected
for a given state, that is, the extent to which the observations of that
state are unreliable (e.g., due to reduced visibility).
In our particle-based representation, we represent eq
s ðsÞ with the
set eS of N particles and eqoðoÞ = Eeqs ðsÞpðojsÞ with the set eO, resulting in
the approximations
egpragm eO
/C16/C17
= 1
N
X
o2eO
lnpðoÞ ð8Þ
and
egepist eS, eO
/C16/C17
= /C0 1
N
P
o2eO
ln 1
N
P
s2eS
pðojsÞ
0
@
1
A
/C0 1
N
P
s2eS
H pðojsÞðÞ ,
ð9Þ
under the assumption that the entropy H pðojsÞðÞ : S ! R can be
calculated analytically. The original model 35 had calculated gepist by
using KDE methods based on eO to approximate eqoðoÞ = Eeqs ðsÞpðojsÞ,
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 16
compared to us using 1
N
P
s2eS
pðojsÞ. We opted for this approach, as the
original estimation would result in an over-approximation of eqoðoÞ,
given that we evaluate the KDE exclusively at the center of each kernel.
Consequently, we use the following approximationeG for the EFE:
eGðπ
t , qðst ÞÞ = Pt + H
τ= t +1
/C0 egpragm eOτ
/C16/C17
/C0 egepist eSτ, eOτ
/C16/C17
:
ð10Þ
When evaluating the pragmatic value, we assume that the pre-
ference (i.e., the distribution of desired observations)p(o) accounts for
four aspects of the agent ’s objective: a) to maintain its desired long-
itudinal velocity, b) to minimize the magnitude of control inputs, c) to
remain on the road and within its current lane (e.g., avoiding lane
markers or opposite lanes), d) prevent collisions, and e) avoiding
hazardous situations. Each of these aspects is represented by an indi-
vidual preference function (Supplementary Information 2.4), which
are multiplied together:
pðoÞ = N ðv
egojμv, σvÞ N ðalong, egoj0, σaÞ
N ðω egoj0, σω Þ platðyegoÞ pcollðoÞ psafeðoÞ : ð11Þ
For psafe(o), the model speci ﬁcally seeks to avoid states where,
under the assumption that the other vehicle begins braking suddenly
with a deceleration of a
OV, min , the ego vehicle would fail to avoid a
collision despite initiating maximum braking after a response
time of 1 s.
Surprise-based re-planning
Our model assumes that on every time step, the agent performs
planning incrementally, unless it observes a surprising event, in which
case it re-plans the full policy. Practically, on every time step, the agent
takes the policy chosen in the previous time step, disregards its ﬁrst
action (as it was already executed) and assumes that the remaining
actions constitute all but the last actions of the new policy. The above
policy selection mechanism is then used to generate the last action of
the new policy.
In parallel with incremental policy updates, on every time step, the
agent accumulates evidence in favor of a full re-plan, using the accu-
mulation rate λ:
E
t = Et/C01 + λϵt : ð12Þ
Traditionally, in evidence accumulation literature, the accumulation
rate is referred to as the drift rate, which is interpreted as the quality of
the incoming evidence
83 and can be linked to the decision-maker ’s
efﬁciency of processing the perceptual information117,118. Here, we fol-
low Engström et al. 6 in accumulating surprise ϵ≥ 0, de ﬁned as the
residual informationof the pragmatic value51:
ϵt = H max olnpðoÞ/C0
Xt + H
τ = t +1
gpragm eqoðoτjπt , qðst ÞÞ
/C0/C1
: ð13Þ
Under this de ﬁnition, the surprise is the difference between the
highest pragmatic value possible and the actual pragmatic value of a
policy. For instance, if a policy would result in the most preferred
observation, the agent would not accumulate any additional evidence.
However, if a policy would lead to an undesired (i.e., a priori unlikely)
observation, much evidence for a re-plan would be gained.
If the accumulated evidence is below the threshold of 1, the model
then follows the extended policy. Otherwise, it generates a completely
new policy, applying the above policy selection mechanism to every
action in the policy.
Finally, after the policy is determined, itsﬁrst action a
t is used to
update the state of the actual world. This is done using the state
transition function of the generative process:
η
t +1 /C24bpðη0jηt , at Þð 14Þ
Metrics
Front-to-rear scenario. In this scenario, we used the vehicle trajectory
and driver input data to extract brake response times and deceleration
magnitudes. To that end, we followed Markkula et al.
14, extracting
response times by ﬁtting a piecewise-linear function to the recorded
v e l o c i t yd a t a ;t h eb r a k er e s p o n s et i m ew a st h e nd e t e r m i n e da st h et i m e
instant when theﬁrst constant line switches to one with falling velocity.
The slope of this line was used as the estimated deceleration
magnitude.
When evaluating the goodness of ﬁto fam o d e lt ot h eg r o u n d -
truth human data, we used the mean absolute error I.G i v e nad a t a s e t
D
0 ={ (x, y)∣x ∈ X0, y ∈ Y0} and a linear approximation of the ground
truth ydata(x)= adatax + bdata over the support interval [x0, x1], we ﬁrst
discarded all sample pairs fromD0 for which x ∉ [x0, x1], resulting inD,
after which we computed the residuals
E = fy /C0ydataðxÞjðx, yÞ2 Dg : ð15Þ
We assumed the residuals can be approximated by a linear function
eðxÞ = αx + β + ε, ε /C24N ð0, σE Þ , ð16Þ
where σE is the empirical standard deviation ofE. We placed Gaussian
priors
p0ðαÞ = N 0, σE
2σX
/C18/C19
, p0ðβÞ = N 0, σE
2
/C16/C17
, ð17Þ
with σX denoting the empirical standard deviation ofX. The posterior
p(α, β∣D) was then obtained using standard Bayesian linear
regression119.D eﬁning
Iðα, βÞ = 1
x1 /C0x0
Z x1
x0
αx + β
/C12/C12 /C12/C12dx, ð18Þ
we estimated the posterior mean μI = Epðα, βjDÞ½Iðα, βÞ/C138and standard
deviation σI =
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Vpðα, βjDÞ½Iðα, βÞ/C138
q
using Monte Carlo sampling from
p(α, β∣D) with 10000 samples.
When analyzing response times (Fig.3da n ds e c o n dr o wo fF i g .6),
we set x0 =0 . 9 sa n dx1 = 3.6 s. Meanwhile, for the acceleration error
(Fig. 3e and third row of Fig. 6), we set x0 =0s −1 and x1 = 1.0 s−1.
Opposite-direction lateral incursion scenario.I nt h i ss c e n a r i o ,w e
extracted brake and steering response times following Johnson et al.62,
by interpolating along the accelerationalong and steering angle δ data
to ﬁn dt h et i m ea tw h i c h− 1m s−2 and 0.0077 rad (i.e., a steering wheel
angle of 5∘) are exceeded, to extract brake and steering response times
respectively.
When evaluating the modelﬁt of our model variants to the human
data in this scenario, we used the Jensen-Shannon divergence (a
measure of dissimilarity of two categorical distributions) to compare
predicted outcomes and the Wasserstein distance (a proper metric) for
reaction times. Given the relatively small size of the ground truth
dataset, we applied nonparametric bootstrapping
120 with 10000
resamples to estimate the sampling variability of each metric.
Intersection scenario. To extract response times, here we followed
the same approach as in the lateral incursion scenario. We only
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 17
compared our model to the ﬁrst collision instance shown to each
participant in the experiment of Ziraldo et al. 63 to ensure that the
underlying data represents natural reactions of human drivers.
Importantly, the human steering reaction times were extracted based
on steering wheel angles. However, as Ziraldo et al.
63 did not report
how this relates to the steering angle of the vehicle (which our model
works with), there might be some discrepancy here, as we had to rely
on the relationship reported by Johnson et al.
62. In this scenario we
used the same bootstrapped metrics as in the lateral incursion sce-
nario (i.e., Jensen-Shannon divergence for collision probabilities and
Wasserstein distance for response times).
Statistic signi ﬁcance. To determine whether one model variant
provided a statistically signiﬁcant betterﬁt than another, we computed
the signal-to-noise ratio of the difference between models, de ﬁned
as the mean difference in metric values divided by its estimated
standard deviation (using sampling from posterior distributions
or bootstrapping as described above). A signal-to-noise ratio exceed-
ing 3 was considered indicative of a meaningful difference, following
standard statistical heuristics
121.H e r e ,t h ed i f f e r e n c ei sc o m p u t e d
as the mean metric difference between models, and under the
assumption of independence, the standard deviation of the difference
is approximated as the square root of the sum of the individual
variances.
Model parameters
Each of the key model mechanisms has a number of parameters
associated with it (see Table1 for an overview of the 26 most essential
parameters). For 12 of them, the exact values have been directly
adopted from the literature, in particular the original model
35.A n o t h e r
thirteen model parameters were treated as free parameters and were
manually tuned to qualitatively match the empirical observations.
It was not the purpose of this study to obtain the closest possible
ﬁt to human data, so no exhaustive parameter optimization was per-
formed. To analyze the impact that changes of model parameters have
on its performance, we conducted a sensitivity analysis (Figs.7 and 8).
Speciﬁcally, we varied the thirteen tuned parameters from Table1 one
at a time, while keeping the other parameters ﬁxed. For most para-
meters, this explored deviation byroughly one order of magnitude, if
not otherwise constrained. For each of the new parameter sets, we
reran all the simulations in the three scenarios described in the Results
section, and calculated the goodness-of-ﬁt metrics (Fig. 6). Using the
methods described in the previous Metrics section to estimate the
uncertainty of those metrics inherent in the limited number of simu-
lations and human demonstrations, we express those in the corre-
sponding box-plots.
The most consequential parameter is the evidence drift rate λ
(Equation (12)), where moderate deviations can lead to large changes
in reaction times and therefore substantially worse goodness ofﬁt( t h e
Table 1 | An overview of the most essential parameters used in the full model, such as in the Cross Entropy Method (CEM) used
for policy selection
Parameter Description Source
State transition functionpðs0 js, aÞ
Δt = 0.2 s Time step size Model of routine driving 35
4.2m × 1.72 m Vehicle size Matching 62
w = 3.65 m Lane width Matching 62
σa,0 =3m s −2 Noise applied to other vehicle’s acceleration during belief update Tuned parameter
σω ,0 =0 . 4 5 7 5m s−2 Noise applied to other vehicle’s steering rate during belief update Tuned parameter
σa =0 . 6m s−2 Noise applied to other vehicle’s acceleration during behavior prediction Tuned parameter
σω =0 . 0 9 1 5m s−2 Noise applied to other vehicle’s steering rate during behavior prediction Tuned parameter
Hn = 20 Prediction horizon for the projected normative probability Tuned parameter
Observation probabilityp(o∣s)
φ
°
0 = 0:00215 s/C01 Looming threshold Taken from 45
Preference functionp(o)
μv = v0 Mean of the preference distribution of the agent’s velocity v Model of routine driving35
σv =0 . 5m s−1 Standard deviation of the preference distribution of the agent’s velocity v Tuned parameter
σa =0 . 1m s−2 Standard deviation of the preference distribution of the agent’sa c c e l e r a t i o na Tuned parameter
σω =0 . 0 2s−1 Standard deviation of the preference distribution of the agent’s steering rate ω Tuned parameter
gLL = − 15000 Pragmatic value for leaving the road Tuned parameter
gLC = − 1000 Pragmatic value for driving on a lane boundary or in opposing lanes Tuned parameter
gC = − 10000 Pragmatic value after collision with relative velocity of 10 ms −1 Tuned parameter
Policy selection
H = 30 Prediction horizon Model of routine driving 35
N = 75 Number of particles Model of routine driving 35
K = 10 Number of iterations of policy sampling Model of routine driving 35
M = 100 Number of sampled policies Tuned parameter
β =0 . 1 βM samples with the lowest EFE are used as the base for the next iteration Model of routine driving 35
N 0, 5 ms/C02/C0/C1 Distribution to sample accelerationsaτ in the ﬁrst CEM iteration Model of routine driving 35 (mean) and Tuned parameter (std)
N 0, 0:1s /C01/C0/C1 Distribution to sample steering ratesω τ in the ﬁrst CEM iteration Model of routine driving 35 (mean) and Tuned parameter (std)
a0 = − 0.1 ms−2 Acceleration applied when no pedal is pressed Logical consideration
λ =1 0−5.95 Evidence accumulation drift rate Tuned parameter
For tuned parameters, we normally only tested three to four different parameters, with the drift rateλ being the noticeable exception.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 18
Fig. 7 | Sensitivity analysis for selected model parameters related to the state transition function and
policy selection (Table 1).The vertical dashed lines indicate theﬁnal values used in the full model. We generally
used a scheme of only changing one parameter at a time. However, when changing σa,0 (middle column), we
changedσω ,0 with the same factor. Meanwhile, in the third column, we ensured thatσa
σa,0
= σω
σω ,0
,w h i l ek e e p i n gσa,0
and σω ,0 ﬁxed. In the box plots, the lower and upper whiskers indicate the 5th and 95th percentiles, respectively.
For λ in the rightmost column, note the change in y- a x i sl a b e l sf o rs o m em e t r i c s .
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 19
Fig. 8 | Sensitivity analysis for selected model parameters related to the preference function (Table 1).The
vertical dashed lines indicate theﬁnal values used in the full model. Similar to Fig.7, we only changed one parameter
at a time; the lower and upper whiskers in the box plots indicate the 5th and 95th percentiles, respectively. While the
metrics used are the same, the scales of they-axes are different than in Fig.7 for illustrative purposes. ForgC in the
rightmost column, note the change iny-axis labels forIΔ.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 20
goodness of ﬁtm e t r i c sIa and W in Fig. 7 can degrade on the order of
seconds). Model behavior also deteriorates, as seen in the Jensen-
Shannon divergences. This is expected, as for example, a suf ﬁcient
increase in λ to trigger re-planning at (nearly) every timestep would in
principle be equivalent to removing the evidence accumulation
mechanism completely from the model, which was shown to be dis-
advantageous for reproducing human behavior in Fig. 6b. However,
our chosen parameter value appears to involve a slight trade-off. In the
lateral incursion and intersection scenarios, small increases in λ can
improve the accuracy of reaction times while worsening outcome
prediction, whereas small decreases show the opposite trend.
Meanwhile, the other hand-tuned policy selection parameter, the
number of simultaneously evaluated policies M, had even weaker
impact (Fig. 7). There, for I
Δ and DJS, increasing or decreasing M
negatively affects the goodness of ﬁt, but there was no evidence that
these differences were statistically signiﬁcant. Meanwhile, forIa and W,
lower M values did yield better ﬁt to the data, but the improvements
were marginal.
Parameters of the state transition function did have a major effect
on model behavior (Fig.7). For σa,0 and σω ,0 (the noise assigned to the
other vehicles’ control actions in the generative model’s state transi-
tion function), we generally observed a U-shaped response across all
considered metrics, indicating that deviations from the chosen values
led to poorer ﬁt to the data, although not all differences were statis-
tically signiﬁcant. Similarly, σ
a and σω (the corresponding noise in the
policy roll-out during behavior prediction, second column) chosen for
the ﬁnal model generally yielded the best goodness-of-ﬁt. The horizon
for calculating the projected normative probability Hn w a sl e s si nﬂu-
ential: it only impacted model behavior in terms of front-to-rear
reaction times ( I
Δ) and the prediction of collision outcomes in the
intersection scenario (DJS).
For the parameters of the preference functionp(o) (Equation (11)),
two primary effects can be observed (Fig.8). First, the choice ofσv and
σa is important for producing a reasonable ﬁt for the deceleration
magnitude applied in the front-to-rear scenario (Ia in Fig. 8). Second,
the choice of collision costgC is critical, with slight deviations from the
selected value leading to substantial decreases in model performance
(Fig. 8). Consequently, ﬁne-tuning of this parameter is of high impor-
tance. Varying the remaining parameters did not result in statistically
signiﬁcant changes, suggesting that their coarse calibration is suf ﬁ-
cient. However, this is somewhat expected, as the initial trajectories of
the ego agents often are aligned with the preferences expressed in
those parameters, which mostly in ﬂuence the speci ﬁc avoidance
maneuver chosen, but not the speciﬁc reaction times. This can be seen
in the speciﬁc metric expressing such behavior (I
a), where especiallyσv
and σa have a signiﬁcant impact.
Especially notable is that– with parameters tuned only on theﬁrst
two scenarios without any exposure to the intersection scenario– the
chosen parameters perform similarly well in the intersection scenario,
suggesting good model generalizability. Taken together, this para-
meter sensitivity analysis indicates that 1) most of the sensitivity of the
model is primarily concentrated in λ and g
C; 2) most parameters are
robust to minor perturbations; and 3) while not necessarily optimal,
our ﬁnal parameter settings achieve a goodﬁt to human data, with no
parameter variations leading to substantially better goodness-of- ﬁt
across all three scenarios.
Data availability
The simulation data generated with our active inference model and its
ablations in this study have been deposited in the OSF database
(https://osf.io/gs4bu). As mentioned in the corresponding captions,
videos of the results shown in Figs. 3, 4, 5 are provided in the Supple-
mentary Materials. Source data underlying theﬁg u r e si sa v a i l a b l ea sa
Source Data ﬁle. Source data are provided in this paper.
Code availability
The code used for the data analysis and modeling in this study is
available at https://github.com/tud-hri/Active-Inference-Collision-
Avoidancewith https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20049511.T h ec o d ei s
provided under a non-commercial license (available athttps://github.
com/tud-hri/Active-Inference-Collision-Avoidance/blob/main/
LICENSE) that permits use for research, teaching, personal experi-
mentation, and scienti ﬁc publication. This includes the use of the
licensed materials for benchmarking in academic or applied research
publications.
References
1. Bärgman, J., Lisovskaja, V., Victor, T., Flannagan, C. & Dozza, M.
How does glance behavior inﬂuence crash and injury risk? A‘what-
if’ counterfactual simulation usingcrashes and near-crashes from
SHRP2. Transp. Res. Part F Trafﬁc Psychol. Behav. 35,
152–169 (2015).
2 . E n g s t r ö m ,J . ,M a r k k u l a ,G . ,X u e ,Q .&M e r a t ,N .S i m u l a t i n gt h e
effect of cognitive load on braking responses in lead vehicle
braking scenarios.IET Intell. Transp. Syst. 12,4 2 7–433 (2018).
3. Bianchi Piccinini, G. et al. How do drivers respond to silent auto-
mation failures? driving simulator study and comparison of com-
putational driver braking models.Hum. Factors J. Hum. Factors
Ergon. Soc. 62,1 2 1 2–1229 (2020).
4. Montali, N. et al. The Waymo OpenSim agents challenge. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 36,5 9 1 5 1–59171 (2023).
5. Olleja, P., Markkula, G. & Bärgman, J. Validation of human
benchmark models for automated driving system approval: How
competent and careful are they really?Accid. Anal. Prev. 213,
107922 (2025).
6. Engström, J., Liu, S. Y., Dinparastdjadid, A. & Simoiu, C. Modeling
road user response timing in naturalistic trafﬁcc o nﬂicts: A
surprise-based framework.Accid. Anal. Prev. 198, 107460 (2024).
7. Matusz, P. J., Dikker, S., Huth, A. G. & Perrodin, C. Are we ready for
real-world neuroscience?J. Cogn. Neurosci. 31,3 2 7–338 (2019).
8. Shamay-Tsoory, S. G. & Mendelsohn, A. Real-life neuroscience: an
ecological approach to brain and behavior research.Perspect.
Psychol. Sci. 14,8 4 1–859 (2019).
9. Carvalho, W. & Lampinen, A. Naturalistic computational cognitive
science: towards generalizable models and theories that capture
the full range of natural behavior. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2502.20349(2025).
1 0 . X u e ,Q . ,M a r k k u l a ,G . ,Y a n ,X .&M e r a t ,N .U s i n gp e r c e p t u a lc u e sf o r
brake response to a lead vehicle: Comparing threshold and
accumulator models of visual looming.Accid. Anal. Prev. 118,
114–124 (2018).
11. Svärd, M., Markkula, G., Bärgman, J. & Victor, T. Computational
modeling of driver pre-crash brake response, with and without off-
road glances: Parameterization using real-world crashes and near-
crashes. Accid. Anal. Prev. 163,1 0 6 4 3 3( 2 0 2 1 ) .
12. Guo, C., Wang, X., Su, L. & Wang, Y. Safety distance model for
longitudinal collision avoidance of logistics vehicles considering
slope and road adhesion coefﬁcient. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng.235,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0954407020959744(2021).
13. Siebinga, O., Zgonnikov, A. & Abbink, D. A. A model of dyadic
merging interactions explains human drivers’ behavior from con-
trol inputs to decisions. PNAS Nexus 3,4 2 0( 2 0 2 4 ) .
1 4 . M a r k k u l a ,G . ,E n g s t r ö m ,J . ,L o d i n ,J . ,B ä r g m a n ,J .&V i c t o r ,T .A
farewell to brake reaction times? Kinematics-dependent brake
response in naturalistic rear-end emergencies.Accid. Anal. Prev.
95,2 0 9–226 (2016).
1 5 . W e i ,R . ,M c D o n a l d ,A .D . ,G a r c i a ,A .&A l a m b e i g i ,H .M o d e l i n g
driver responses to automation failures with active inference.IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.23,1 8 0 6 4–18075 (2022).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 21
16. Li, T., Kovaceva, J. & Dozza, M. Modeling collision avoidance man-
euvers for micromobility vehicles.J. Saf. Res. 87,2 3 2–243 (2023).
17. Yuan, Y., Weng, X., Ou, Y., & Kitani, K. M. Agentformer: Agent-
aware transformers for socio-temporal multi-agent forecasting. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International conference on computer
vision 9813–9823 (2021).
18. Suo, S., Regalado, S., Casas, S. & Urtasun, R. Traf ﬁcsim: Learning
to simulate realistic multi-agent behaviors. InProceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision and Pattern Recognition
10400–10409 (2021).
19. Gu, T. et al. Stochastic trajectory prediction via motion inde-
terminacy diffusion. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition17113–17122 (2022).
20. Igl, M. et al. Symphony: Learning realistic and diverse agents for
autonomous driving simulation. InProceedings 2022 International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)(IEEE, 2022).
21. Mészáros, A., Schumann, J. F., Alonso-Mora, J., Zgonnikov, A., &
Kober, J. TrajFlow: Learning Distributions over Trajectories for
Human Behavior Prediction. In2024 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles
Symposium (IV) 184–191 (2024).
22. Aydemir, G., Akan, A. K., & Güney, F. Adapt: Ef ﬁcient multi-agent
trajectory prediction with adaptation. InProceedings of the IEEE/
CVF International Conference on Computer Vision8295–8305
(2023).
23. Ivanovic, B., Song, G., Gilitschenski, I. & Pavone, M. trajdata: A
uniﬁed interface to multiple human trajectory datasets.Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 36,2 7 5 8 2–27593 (2023).
24. Schumann, J. F., Kober, J. & Zgonnikov, A. Benchmarking behavior
prediction models in gap acceptance scenarios.IEEE Trans. Intell.
Veh. 8,2 5 8 0–2591 (2023).
25. Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P. & Pezzulo,
G. Active inference: a process theory.Neural Comput. 29,
1–49 (2017).
26. Da Costa, L., Parr, T., Sajid, N., Veselic, S., Neacsu, V. & Friston, K.
Active inference on discrete state-spaces: a synthesis.J. Math.
Psychol. 99, 102447 (2020).
27. Parr, T., Pezzulo, G. & Friston, K.J. Active Inference: The Free Energy
Principle in Mind, Brain, and Behavior(MIT Press, 2022).
28. Smith, R., Badcock, P. & Friston, K. J. Recent advances in the
application of predictive coding and active inference models
within clinical neuroscience.Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci.75,
3–13 (2021).
29. Vasil, J., Badcock, P. B., Constant, A., Friston, K. & Ramstead, M. J.
D. A world unto itself: human communication as active inference.
Front. Psychol. 11
,4 1 7( 2 0 2 0 ) .
30. Bottemanne, H. & Friston, K. J. An active inference account of
protective behaviours during the COVID-19 pandemic. Cogn.
Affect. Behav. Neurosci.21, 1117–1129 (2021).
31. Harris, D. J. et al. An active inference account of skilled anticipa-
tion in sport: using computational models to formalise theory and
generate new hypotheses.Sports Med. 52,2 0 2 3–2038 (2022).
32. Novický, F., Meera, A.A., Zeldenrust, F. & Lanillos, P. Precision not
prediction: Body-ownership illusion as a consequence of online
precision adaptation under Bayesian inference. Preprint athttps://
doi.org/10.1101/2024.09.04.611162(2024).
33. Engström, J. et al. Great expectations: a predictive processing
account of automobile driving.Theor. Issues Ergon. Sci. 19,
156–194 (2018).
34. Wei, R. et al. World Model Learning from Demonstrations with
Active Inference: Application to Driving Behavior,i n Active Infer-
ence (Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 2023).
35. Engström, J. et al. Resolving uncertainty on the ﬂy: modeling
adaptive driving behavior as active inference.Front. Neurorobot.
18,1 3 4 1 7 5 0( 2 0 2 4 ) .
36. Lee, D. N. A theory of visual control of braking based on
information about time-to-collision. Perception 5,4 3 7–459
(1976).
37. Gibson, J.J. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception: Classic
Edition (Psychology Press, New York, 2014).
38. Luce, R.D. Response Times: Their Role in Inferring Elementary
Mental Organization(Oxford University Press on Demand, 1986).
39. Gold, J. I. & Shadlen, M. N. The neural basis of decision making.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 30,5 3 5–574 (2007).
40. Ratcliff, R. & Van Dongen, H. P. Diffusion model for one-choice
reaction-time tasks and the cognitive effects of sleep deprivation.
P r o c .N a t l .A c a d .S c i .U S A108, 11285–11290 (2011).
41. Markkula, G. Modeling driver control behavior in both routine and
near-accident driving.In Proceedings of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting(SAGE Publications, Sage CA:
Los Angeles, CA, 2014).
42. Pekkanen, J. et al. A computational model for driver ’s cognitive
state, visual perception and intermittent attention in a distracted
car following task. R. Soc. Open Sci. 5, 180194 (2018).
43. Tian, K. et al. Explaining unsafe pedestrian road crossing beha-
viours using a psychophysics-based gap acceptance model.Saf.
Sci. 154, 105837 (2022).
44. Hoffmann, E. R. Estimation of ti me to vehicle arrival-effects of age
on use of available visual information.Perception
23,
947–955 (1994).
45. Lamble, D., Laakso, M. & Summala, H. Detection thresholds in car
following situations and peripheral vision: implications for posi-
tioning of visually demanding in-car displays.Ergonomics42,
807–815 (1999).
46. Murphy, K.P. Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective(MIT
press, 2012).
47. Laurent, H., Sangnier, M. & Treibich, C. Traf ﬁc safety and norms of
compliance with rules: An exploratory study.Econ. Bull. 41,
2464–2483 (2021).
48. Abbas, S., Fatima, S., Sharif, A. & Adnan, S. M. Drivers ’ knowledge,
attitude and practices towards trafﬁc rules and regulations. J.
Road. Saf. 35,2 4–31 (2024).
49. Tennant, C. et al. Code, culture , and concrete: Self-driving vehi-
cles and the rules of the road. Front. Sustain. Cities3,
710478 (2021).
50. Bicchieri, C. The Grammar of Society(2006).
51. Dinparastdjadid, A., Supeene, I. & Engstrom, J. Measuring surprise
in the wild. Preprint athttps://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.
07733 (2023).
52. de Boer, P. T., Kroese, D. P., Mannor, S. & Rubinstein, R. Y. A tutorial
on the cross-entropy method.Ann. Oper. Res. 134,1 9–67 (2005).
53. Simon, H.A. et al. A behavioral model of rational choice. Q. J. Econ.
69,9 9–118 (1955).
5 4 . S u m m a l a ,H .i nModelling Driver Behaviour in Automotive Envir-
onments: Critical Issues in Driver Interactions with Intelligent
Transport Systems, ed. by Cacciabue, P.C. (Springer, Lon-
don, 2007).
55. Oh, H. et al. Satis ﬁcing in split-second decision making is char-
acterized by strategic cue discounting.J. Exp. Psychol. Learn.
Mem. Cogn. 42,1 9 3 7–1956 (2016).
56. Callaway, F. et al. Rational use of cognitive resources in human
planning. Nat. Hum. Behav. 6, 1112–1125 (2022).
57. Engstroem, J. et al. Scenario criticality determines the effect of
working memory load on brake response time. In Proceedings of
the European Conference on Human Centred Design for Intelligent
Transport Systems(2010).
58. Brookhuis, K. A., de Vries, G. & de Waard, D. The effects of mobile
telephoning on driving performance.Accid. Anal. Prev. 23,
309–316 (1991).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 22
5 9 . L e e ,J .D . ,C a v e n ,B . ,H a a k e ,S .&B r o w n ,T .L .S p e e c h - b a s e d
interaction with in-vehicle computers: the effect of speech-based
e-mail on drivers’ attention to the roadway. Hum. Factors 43,
631–640 (2001).
60. Victor, T. et al. Analysis of natur alistic driving study data: Safer
glances, driver inattention, and crash risk.https://nap.
nationalacademies.org/catalog/22297(2015).
61. Engström, J., Werneke, J., Bärgman, J., Nguyen, N. & Cook, B.
Analysis of the role of inattention in road crashes based on nat-
uralistic on-board safety monitoring data. InProceedings 3rd
International Conference on Driver Distraction and Inatten-
tion (2013).
62. Johnson, L., Engström, J., Srinivasan, A., Özturk, I. & Markkula, G.
Looking for an out: Affordances, uncertainty and collision avoid-
ance behavior of human drivers. Preprint athttps://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2505.14842(2025).
63. Ziraldo, E., Attalla, S., Kodsi, S. & Oliver, M. Driver response to right
turning path intrusions at signalized intersections.S A EI n t .J .A d v .
Curr. Pract. Mobil. 2,1 6 2 3–1632 (2020).
64. Brännström, M., Coelingh, E. & Sjöberg, J. Decision-making on
when to brake and when to steer to avoid a collision. Int. J. Veh.
Saf. 7,8 7–106 (2014).
65. Venkatraman, V., Lee, J. D. & Schwarz, C. W. Steer or brake?:
modeling drivers’ collision-avoidance behavior by using percep-
tual cues. Transp. Res. Rec. 2602,9 7–103 (2016).
66. Hu, M. et al. Decision tree-based maneuver prediction for driver
rear-end risk-avoidance behaviors in cut-in scenarios.J. Adv.
Transp. 2017,e 7 1 7 0 3 5 8( 2 0 1 7 ) .
67. Sarkar, A. et al. Steering or braking avoidance response in SHRP2
rear-end crashes and near-crashes: A decision tree approach.
Accid. Anal. Prev. 154, 106055 (2021).
68. Aust, M. L., Engström, J. & Viström, M. Effects of forward
collision warning and repeated event exposure on emer-
gency braking. Transp. Res. Part F Traf ﬁc Psychol. Behav. 18,
34–46 (2013).
69. McDonald, A. D. et al. Toward computational simulations of
behavior during automated driving takeovers: a review of the
Empirical and Modeling Literatures.Hum. Factors 61,
642–688 (2019).
70. Van Den Berg, J., Patil, S. & Alterovitz, R. Motion planning under
uncertainty using iterative local optimization in belief space.Int. J.
Robot. Res. 31,1 2 6 3–1278 (2012).
71. Kusano, K. D. & Gabler, H. C. Safety bene ﬁts of forward collision
warning, brake assist, and autonomous braking systems in rear-
end collisions.IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.13,1 5 4 6
–1555 (2012).
72. Svärd, M., Markkula, G., Engström, J., Granum, F. & Bärgman, J. A
quantitative driver model of pre-crash brake onset and control. In
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual
Meeting (SAGE Publications, 2017).
7 3 . F r i e s ,A . ,F a h r e n k r o g ,F . ,D o n a u e r ,K . ,M a i ,M .&R a i s c h ,F .D r i v e r
behavior model for the safety assessment of automated driving. In
2022 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV)(IEEE, 2022).
74. Fries, A., Lemberg, L., Fahrenkrog, F., Mai, M. & Das, A. Modeling
driver behavior in critical trafﬁc scenarios for the safety assess-
ment of automated driving.TrafﬁcI n j .P r e v .24,S 1 0 5–S110 (2023).
75. de Oliveira, L.F.A., Schories, L., Brostek, L. & Meywerk, M.
Simulation-based evaluation of a generic autonomous emergency
braking system using a cognitive pedestrian behavior model. In
Proceedings 27th International Technical Conference on the
Enhanced Safety of Vehicles (ESV)(2023).
76. Rössert, C., Drever, J. & Brostek, L. Cognitive behavior model
replicates road user response timing in naturalistic rear-end trafﬁc
conﬂictshttps://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/su5kt(2024).
77. Hubmann, C., Becker, M., Althoff, D., Lenz, D. & Stiller, C. Decision
making for autonomous driving considering interaction and
uncertain prediction of surrounding vehicles. InProceedings 2017
IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV)(IEEE, 2017).
78. Brechtel, S., Gindele, T. & Dillmann, R. Probabilistic decision-
making under uncertainty for autonomous driving using con-
tinuous POMDPs. In Proceedings 17th International IEEE Con-
ference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC)(2014).
79. Bouton, M., Cosgun, A. & Kochend erfer, M.J. Belief state planning
for autonomously navigating urban intersections. InProceedings
2017 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV)(IEEE, 2017).
80. Pekkanen, J. et al. Variable-drift diffusion models of pedestrian
road-crossing decisions.Comput. Brain Behav. 5,6 0–80 (2022).
81. Zgonnikov, A., Abbink, D. & Markkula, G. Should I stay or should I
go? Cognitive modeling of left-turn gap acceptance decisions in
human drivers. Hum. Fact. 66,1 3 9 9–1413 (2022).
82. Schumann, J.F., Srinivasan, A.R., Kober, J., Markkula, G. & Zgon-
nikov, A. Using models based on cognitive theory to predict
human behavior in trafﬁc: a case study. In Proceedings 2023 IEEE
26th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Sys-
tems (ITSC)(2023).
83. Ratcliff, R., Smith, P. L., Brown, S. D. & McKoon, G. Diffusion
decision model: Currentissues and history.Trends Cogn. Sci.20,
260–281 (2016).
8 4 . F i t z G e r a l d ,T .H .B . ,S c h w a r t e n b e c k ,P . ,M o u t o u s s i s ,M . ,D o l a n ,R .J .
& Friston, K. Active inference, evidence accumulation, and the urn
task. Neural Comput. 27,3 0 6–328 (2015).
85. Varela, F.J., Thompson, E., Rosch, E. The Embodied Mind, revised
edition: Cognitive Science and Human Experience(MIT
Press, 2017).
86. Thompson, E. Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sci-
ences of Mind (Harvard University Press, 2010).
87. Friston, K. Life as we know it. J. R. Soc. Interface
10,
20130475 (2013).
88. Kiverstein, J., Kirchhoff, M. D. & Froese, T. The problem of mean-
ing: the free energy principle and artiﬁcial agency. Front. Neu-
rorobot. 16, 844773 (2022).
89. Friston, K. et al. in Affordances in Everyday Life: A Multidisciplinary
Collection of Essays (Springer International Publishing,
Cham, 2022).
90. Ramstead, M.J.D. et al. in Affordances in Everyday Life: A Multi-
disciplinary Collection of Essays(Springer International Publish-
ing, Cham, 2022).
91. Calvo, P. & Friston, K. Predicting green: really radical (plant) pre-
dictive processing.J. R. Soc. Interface 14,2 0 1 7 0 0 9 6( 2 0 1 7 ) .
92. Van de Maele, T., Dhoedt, B., Verbelen, T. & Pezzulo, G. A
hierarchical active inference model of spatial alternation
tasks and the hippocampal-prefrontal circuit. Nat. Commun.
15,9 8 9 2( 2 0 2 4 ) .
9 3 . K a s t e l ,N . ,H e s p ,C . ,R i d d e r i n k h o f ,K .R .&F r i s t o n ,K .J .S m a l ls t e p s
for mankind: Modeling the emergence of cumulative culture from
joint active inference communication.Front. Neurorobot.16,
944986 (2023).
94. Wei, R. et al. Learning an active inference model of driver percep-
tion and control: Application to vehicle car-following. InProceed-
ings IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems(2025).
9 5 . F r i s t o n ,K . ,D aC o s t a ,L . ,H a f n e r ,D . ,H e s p ,C .&P a r r ,T .S o p h i s t i -
cated inference.Neural Comput. 33,7 1 3–763 (2021).
96. Chohan, A., Savelsbergh, G. J., Van Kampen, P., Wind, M. & Ver-
heul, M. H. Postural adjustments and bearing angle use in inter-
ceptive actions.Exp. Brain Res. 171,4 7–55 (2006).
97. Larish, J. F. & Flach, J. M. Sources of optical information useful for
perception of speed of rectilinear self-motion.J. Exp. Psychol.
Hum. Percept. Perform.16, 295 (1990).
98. Fajen, B. R. Calibration, information, and control strategies for
braking to avoid a collision.J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform.
31, 480 (2005).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 23
9 9 . W e i ,R . ,L e e ,J . ,W a k a y a m a ,S . ,T s c h a n t z ,A . ,H e i n s ,C . ,B u c k l e y ,C . ,
... & Rajagopal, R. Navigation under uncertainty: Trajectory pre-
diction and occlusion reasoning with switching dynamical sys-
tems. In 2025 IEEE International Automated Vehicle Validation
Conference (IAVVC)1–6 (2025).
1 0 0 . P e l é ,M .e ta l .C u l t u r a li nﬂuence of social information use in
pedestrian road-crossing behaviours.R. Soc. Open Sci. 4,
160739 (2017).
101. Özkan, T., Lajunen, T., Chliaoutakis, J. E., Parker, D. & Summala, H.
Cross-cultural differences in driving behaviours: A comparison of
six countries. Transp. Res. Part F Trafﬁc Psychol. Behav. 9,
227–242 (2006).
102. Salzmann, T., Ivanovic, B., Chak ravarty, P. & Pavone, M. Trajectron
++: Dynamically-feasible trajectory forecasting with hetero-
geneous data. In European conference on computer vision
683–700 (2020).
1 0 3 . M a n g a l a m ,K . ,A n ,Y . ,G i r a s e ,H .&M a l i k ,J .F r o mG o a l s ,W a y p o i n t s
& Paths to long term human trajectory forecasting. InProceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision (2021).
104. Girgis, R. et al. Latent variable sequential set transformers for joint
multi-agent motion prediction. InProceedings 10th International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022(2022).
105. Shi, S., Jiang, L., Dai, D. & Schiele, B. Motion transformer with
global intention localization and local movement reﬁnement.Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 35,6 5 3 1–6543 (2022).
106. Nayakanti, N. et al. Wayformer: motion forecasting via simple &
efﬁcient attention networks. InProceedings 2023 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)(2023).
107. Schumann, J.F., Mészáros, A., Kober, J. & Zgonnikov, A. Step:
Structured training and evaluation platform for benchmarking
trajectory prediction models. Preprint athttps://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2509.14801(2025).
108. Wei, R., McDonald, A.D., Mehta, R.K. & Garcia, A. Active inference
models of AV takeovers: relating model parameters to trust,
situation awareness, and fatigue.Hum. Factors67, https://doi.org/
10.1177/00187208241295932(2024).
109. Lanillos, P. et al. Active inference in robotics and arti ﬁcial agents:
survey and challenges. Preprint athttps://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
2112.01871(2021).
110. Mazzaglia, P., Verbelen, T., Çatal, O. & Dhoedt, B. The free energy
principle for perception and action: a deep learning perspective.
Entropy 24, 301 (2022).
111. Fremont, D.J. et al. Formal scenario-based testing of autonomous
v e h i c l e s :F r o ms i m u l a t i o nt ot h er e a lw o r l d .I nProceedings 2020
IEEE 23rd International Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Systems (ITSC) (IEEE, 2020).
112. Uzzaman, A., Islam, M. & Hossain, M. S. Testing autonomous
vehicles in virtual environments: A review of simulation tools and
techniques.Control Syst. Optim. Lett. 3,1 5 1–
157 (2025).
113. Deisenroth, M.P., Faisal, A.A., Ong, C.S. Mathematics for Machine
Learning (Cambridge University Press, 2020).
114. Fischer, J. & Tas, O.S. Information particle ﬁlter tree: an online
algorithm for POMDPs with belief-based rewards on continuous
domains. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
Machine Learning(PMLR, 2020).
115. Polack, P., Altché, F., d ’A n d r é a - N o v e l ,B .&d eL aF o r t e l l e ,A .T h e
kinematic bicycle model: A consistent model for planning feasible
trajectories for autonomous vehicles? InProceedings 2017 IEEE
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV)(2017).
116. Weber, H., Eckstein, L., Beringhoff, F. & Josten, J. Towards mod-
eling driver performance within crash-relevant scenarios as a vir-
tual reference for the Safety of Automated Vehicles. In
Proceedings 27th International Technical Conference on the
Enhanced Safety of Vehicles (ESV)(2023).
117. Metin, B. et al. Adhd performance re ﬂects inefﬁcient but not
impulsive information processing: a diffusion model analysis.
Neuropsychology27,1 9 3( 2 0 1 3 ) .
118. Reinhartz, A., Strobach, T., Jacobsen, T. & von Bastian, C. C.
Mechanisms of training-relatedchange in processing speed: a
drift-diffusion model approach.J. Cogn. 6,4 6( 2 0 2 3 ) .
1 1 9 . B o x ,G . E .&T i a o ,G . C .Bayesian Inference in Statistical Analysis
(John Wiley & Sons, 2011).
120. Tibshirani, R. J. & Efron, B. An introduction to the bootstrap.
M o n o g r .S t a t .A p p l .P r o b a b .57,1 –436 (1993).
121. Casella, G. & Berger, R. Statistical Inference(Chapman and Hall/
CRC, 2024).
Acknowledgements
We thank Daphne Cornelisse for creating Figs.1 and 2, as well as Martijn
Wisse, Todd Hester, Ran Wei, and Trent Victor for providing helpful
feedback on the manuscript.
Author contributions
J.F.S.: Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Investiga-
tion, Writing - Original Draft, Visualization.J.E.: Conceptualization, Vali-
dation, Writing - Original Draft, Supervision, Project administration,
Funding acquisition.L.J.: Formal analysis, Writing - Review & Editing,
Visualization.M.O’.K.: Writing - Review & Editing.J.M.:W r i t i n g-R e v i e w&
Editing. J.K.: Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision. A.Z.: Resources,
Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding
acquisition.
Competing interests
J.E., M.O’.K., L.J., and J.M. were employed by Waymo LLC and con-
ducted the research without any external funding from third parties.
Techniques discussed in this paper may be described in U.S. Patent
Application Nos. 18/614,428 and 63/657,623. Delft University of
Technology received funding from Waymo LLC for parts of the
research carried out by J.F.S., but J.F.S. received no direct ﬁnancial
beneﬁt for his contributions to the paper. The remaining authors
declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary informationThe online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0.
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Johan Engström.
Peer review informationNature Communicationsthanks Conor Heins,
Franck Mars and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution
to the peer review of this work. A peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 24
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed
material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted
material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third
party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
Commons licence, unless indicatedotherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2026
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-73345-0
Nature Communications|         (2026) 17:5009 25